
Project Gutenberg's  Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle

TheBook for  use of anyone anywhere at no cost  with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under  terms of  Project Gutenberg License included
with theBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title:  Adventures of Sherlock Holmes

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release Date: November 29, 2002 [EBook #1661]
Last Updated: May 20, 2019

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THPROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK  ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***



Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer  Jose Menendez



cover



 Adventures of Sherlock Holmes



by Arthur Conan Doyle



Contents


   I.     A Scal in Bohemia
   II.     Red-Headed League
   III.   A Case of Identity
   IV.     Boscombe Valley Mystery
   V.      Five Orange Pips
   VI.     Man with  Twisted Lip
   VII.    Adventure of  Blue Carbuncle
   VIII.   Adventure of  Speckled B
   IX.     Adventure of  Engineer’s Thumb
   X.      Adventure of  Noble Bachelor
   XI.     Adventure of  Beryl Coronet
   XII.    Adventure of  Copper Beeches



I. A SCAL IN BOHEMIA


I.

Sherlock Holmes she always __ woman. have seldom heard him
mention her under any or name. In heyes she eclipses 
predominates  whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotion
akin love for Irene Adler. All emotions,  that one particularly,
were abhorrent hcold, precise but admirably balanced mind. He
was, take it,  most perfect reasoning  observing machine that
 world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in a
false position. He never spoke of  softer passions, save with a gibe
 a sneer. y were admirable things for  observer—excellent for
drawing  veil from men’s motives  actions. But for  trained
reasoner admit such intrusions inhown delicate  finely
adjusted temperament was introduce a distracting factor which might
throw a doubt upon all hmental results. Grit in a sensitive
instrument, or a crack in one of hown high-power lenses, would not
be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his. 
yet re was but one woman him,  that woman was  late Irene
Adler, of dubious  questionable memory.

had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away
from each or. My own complete happiness,   home-centred
interests which rise up around  man who first finds himself master
of hown establishment, were sufficient absorb all my attention,
while Holmes, who load every form of society with hwhole Bohemian
soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among hold
books,  alternating from week week between cocaine  ambition,
 drowsiness of  drug,   fierce energy of hown keen
nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by  study of crime,
 occupied himmense faculties  extraordinary powers of
observation in following out those clues,  clearing up those
mysteries which had been aboned as hopeless by  official police.
From time time heard some vague account of hdoings: of his
summons Odessa in  case of  Trepoff murder, of hclearing up
of  singular tragedy of  Atkinson brors at Trincomalee, 
finally of  mission which he had accomplished so delicately 
successfully for  reigning family of Holl. Beyond se signs of
hactivity, however, which merely shared with all  readers of
 daily press, knew little of my former friend  companion.

One night—it was on  twentieth of March, 1888—was returning from a
journey a patient (for had now returned civil practice), when
my way led me through Baker Street. As passed  well-remembered
door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, 
with  dark incidents of  Study in Scarlet, was seized with a
keen desire see Holmes again,  know how he was employing his
extraordinary powers. Hrooms were brilliantly lit, , even as I
looked up, saw htall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette
against  blind. He was pacing  room swiftly, eagerly, with his
head sunk upon hchest  hhs clasped behind him. me, who
knew hevery mood  habit, hattitude  manner told ir own
story. He was at work again. He had risen out of hdrug-created
dreams  was hot upon  scent of some new problem. rang  bell
 was shown up  chamber which had formerly been in part my own.

Hmanner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, think,
see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved
me an armchair, threw across hcase of cigars,  indicated a
spirit case  a gasogene in  corner. n he stood before  fire
 looked me over in hsingular introspective fashion.

“Wedlock suits you,” he remarked. “think, Watson, that you have put
on seven  a half pounds since saw you.”

“Seven!” answered.

“Indeed, should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I
fancy, Watson.  in practice again, observe. You did not tell me
that you intended go inharness.”

“n, how do you know?”

“see it, deduce it. How do know that you have been getting
yourself very wet lately,  that you have a most clumsy  careless
servant girl?”

“My dear Holmes,” said I, “thtoo much. You would certainly have
been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It true that had a
country walk on Thursday  came home in a dreadful mess, but as I
have changed my clos can’t imagine how you deduce it. As Mary
Jane, she incorrigible,  my wife has given her notice, but re,
again, fail see how you work it out.”

He chuckled himself  rubbed hlong, nervous hs toger.

“It simplicity itself,” said he; “my eyes tell me that on  inside
of your left shoe, just where  firelight strikes it,  lear is
scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously y have been caused by
someone who has very carelessly scraped round  edges of  sole in
order remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double
deduction that you had been out in vile wear,  that you had a
particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of  London slavey. As
your practice, if a gentleman walks inmy rooms smelling of
iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon hright
forefinger,  a bulge on  right side of htop-hat show where
he has secreted hstethoscope, must be dull, indeed, if do not
pronounce him be an active member of  medical profession.”

could not help laughing at  ease with which he explained his
process of deduction. “When hear you give your reasons,” remarked,
“ thing always appears me be so ridiculously simple that I
could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your
reasoning am baffled until you explain your process.  yet I
believe that my eyes are as good as yours.”

“Quite so,” he answered, lighting a cigarette,  throwing himself
down inan armchair. “You see, but you do not observe. 
distinction clear. For example, you have frequently seen  steps
which lead up from  hall throom.”

“Frequently.”

“How often?”

“Well, some hundreds of times.”

“n how many are re?”

“How many? don’t know.”

“Quite so! You have not observed.  yet you have seen. That just
my point. Now, know that re are seventeen steps, because have
both seen  observed. By  way, since you are interested in se
little problems,  since you are good enough chronicle one or two
of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.” He threw
over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying open
upon  table. “It came by  last post,” said he. “Read it aloud.”

 note was undated,  without eir signature or address.

“re will call upon you to-night, at a quarter eight o’clock,” it
said, “a gentleman who desires consult you upon a matter of  very
deepest moment. Your recent services one of  royal houses of
Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with
matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.
Thaccount of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your
chamber n at that hour,  do not take it amiss if your visitor
wear a mask.”

“Thindeed a mystery,” remarked. “What do you imagine that it
means?”

“have no data yet. It a capital mistake orise before one has
data. Insensibly one begins twist facts suit ories, instead of
ories suit facts. But  note itself. What do you deduce from
it?”

carefully examined  writing,   paper upon which it was
written.

“ man who wrote it was presumably well do,” remarked,
endeavouring imitate my companion’s processes. “Such paper could not
be bought under half a crown a packet. It peculiarly strong 
stiff.”

“Peculiar—that  very word,” said Holmes. “It not an English
paper at all. Hold it up  light.”

did so,  saw a large “E” with a small “g,” a “P,”  a large “G”
with a small “t” woven in texture of  paper.

“What do you make of that?” asked Holmes.

“ name of  maker, no doubt; or hmonogram, rar.”

“Not at all.  ‘G’ with  small ‘t’ sts for ‘Gesellschaft,’
which  German for ‘Company.’ It a customary contraction like
our ‘Co.’ ‘P,’ of course, sts for ‘Papier.’ Now for  ‘Eg.’ Let us
glance at our Continental Gazetteer.” He took down a heavy brown volume
from hshelves. “Eglow, Eglonitz—here we are, Egria. It in a
German-speaking country—in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. ‘Remarkable
as being  scene of  death of Wallenstein,  for its numerous
glass-factories  paper-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of
that?” Heyes sparkled,  he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud
from hcigarette.

“ paper was made in Bohemia,” said.

“Precisely.   man who wrote  note a German. Do you note 
peculiar construction of  sentence—‘Thaccount of you we have from
all quarters received.’ A Frenchman or Russian could not have written
that. It  German who so uncourteous hverbs. It only
remains, refore, discover what wanted by thGerman who
writes upon Bohemian paper  prefers wearing a mask showing his
face.  here he comes, if am not mistaken, resolve all our
doubts.”

As he spoke re was  sharp sound of horses’ hoofs  grating
wheels against  curb, followed by a sharp pull at  bell. Holmes
whistled.

“A pair, by  sound,” said he. “Yes,” he continued, glancing out of
 window. “A nice little brougham  a pair of beauties. A hundred
 fifty guineas apiece. re’s money in thcase, Watson, if re
nothing else.”

“think that had better go, Holmes.”

“Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. am lost without my Boswell.
 thpromises be interesting. It would be a pity miss it.”

“But your client—”

“Never mind him. may want your help,  so may he. Here he comes.
Sit down in that armchair, Doctor,  give us your best attention.”

A slow  heavy step, which had been heard upon  stairs  in 
passage, paused immediately outside  door. n re was a loud 
authoritative tap.

“Come in!” said Holmes.

A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches
in height, with  chest  limbs of a Hercules. Hdress was rich
with a richness which would, in Engl, be looked upon as akin bad
taste. Heavy bs of astrakhan were slashed across  sleeves 
fronts of hdouble-breasted coat, while  deep blue cloak which was
thrown over hshoulders was lined with flame-coloured silk 
secured at  neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flaming
beryl. Boots which extended halfway up hcalves,  which were
trimmed at  tops with rich brown fur, completed  impression of
barbaric opulence which was suggested by hwhole appearance. He
carried a broad-brimmed hat in hh, while he wore across  upper
part of hface, extending down past  cheekbones, a black vizard
mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for hh
was still raised it as he entered. From  lower part of  face
he appeared be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip,
 a long, straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed  length
of obstinacy.

“You had my note?” he asked with a deep harsh voice  a strongly
marked German accent. “told you that would call.” He looked from
one  or of us, as if uncertain which address.

“Pray take a seat,” said Holmes. “Thmy friend  colleague, Dr.
Watson, who occasionally good enough help me in my cases. Whom
have  honour address?”

“You may address me as  Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I
underst that thgentleman, your friend, a man of honour 
discretion, whom may trust with a matter of  most extreme
importance. If not, should much prefer communicate with you
alone.”

rose go, but Holmes caught me by  wrist  pushed me back into
my chair. “It both, or none,” said he. “You may say before this
gentleman anything which you may say me.”

 Count shrugged hbroad shoulders. “n must begin,” said he,
“by binding you both absolute secrecy for two years; at  end of
that time  matter will be of no importance. At present it not too
much say that it of such weight it may have an influence upon
European history.”

“promise,” said Holmes.

“ I.”

“You will excuse thmask,” continued our strange visitor. “ august
person who employs me wishes hagent be unknown you,  may
confess at once that  title by which have just called myself is
not exactly my own.”

“was aware of it,” said Holmes dryly.

“ circumstances are of great delicacy,  every precaution has to
be taken quench what might grow be an immense scal 
seriously compromise one of  reigning families of Europe. speak
plainly,  matter implicates  great House of Ormstein, hereditary
kings of Bohemia.”

“was also aware of that,” murmured Holmes, settling himself down in
harmchair  closing heyes.

Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at  languid,
lounging figure of  man who had been no doubt depicted him as 
most incisive reasoner  most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes
slowly reopened heyes  looked impatiently at hgigantic client.

“If your Majesty would condescend state your case,” he remarked, “I
should be better able advise you.”

 man sprang from hchair  paced up  down  room in
uncontrollable agitation. n, with a gesture of desperation, he tore
 mask from hface  hurled it upon  ground. “You are right,”
he cried; “am  King. Why should attempt conceal it?”

“Why, indeed?” murmured Holmes. “Your Majesty had not spoken before I
was aware that was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von
Ormstein, Gr Duke of Cassel-Felstein,  hereditary King of
Bohemia.”

“But you can underst,” said our strange visitor, sitting down once
more  passing hh over hhigh white forehead, “you can
underst that am not accustomed doing such business in my own
person. Yet  matter was so delicate that could not confide it to
an agent without putting myself in hpower. have come _incognito_
from Prague for  purpose of consulting you.”

“n, pray consult,” said Holmes, shutting heyes once more.

“ facts are briefly se: Some five years ago, during a lengthy
visit Warsaw, made  acquaintance of  well-known adventuress,
Irene Adler.  name no doubt familiar you.”

“Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor,” murmured Holmes without
opening heyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing
all paragraphs concerning men  things, so that it was difficult to
name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish
information. In thcase found her biography swiched in between
that of a Hebrew rabb that of a staff-commer who had written a
monograph upon  deep-sea fishes.

“Let me see!” said Holmes. “Hum! Born in New Jersey in  year 1858.
Contralto—hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw—yes!
Retired from operatic stage—ha! Living in London—quite so! Your
Majesty, as underst, became entangled with thyoung person,
wrote her some compromising letters,  now desirous of getting
those letters back.”

“Precisely so. But how—”

“Was re a secret marriage?”

“None.”

“No legal papers or certificates?”

“None.”

“n fail follow your Majesty. If thyoung person should
produce her letters for blackmailing or or purposes, how she to
prove ir aunticity?”

“re  writing.”

“Pooh, pooh! Forgery.”

“My private note-paper.”

“Stolen.”

“My own seal.”

“Imitated.”

“My photograph.”

“Bought.”

“We were both in  photograph.”

“Oh, dear! That very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an
indiscretion.”

“was mad—insane.”

“You have compromised yourself seriously.”

“was only Crown Prince n. was young. am but thirty now.”

“It must be recovered.”

“We have tried  failed.”

“Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought.”

“She will not sell.”

“Stolen, n.”

“Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her
house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has
been waylaid. re has been no result.”

“No sign of it?”

“Absolutely none.”

Holmes laughed. “It quite a pretty little problem,” said he.

“But a very serious one me,” returned  King reproachfully.

“Very, indeed.  what does she propose do with  photograph?”

“ruin me.”

“But how?”

“am about be married.”

“So have heard.”

“Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of  King of
Scinavia. You may know  strict principles of her family. She is
herself  very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as my conduct
would bring  matter an end.”

“ Irene Adler?”

“Threatens send m  photograph.  she will do it. know that
she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. She
has  face of  most beautiful of women,   mind of  most
resolute of men. Rar than should marry anor woman, re are no
lengths which she would not go—none.”

“You are sure that she has not sent it yet?”

“am sure.”

“ why?”

“Because she has said that she would send it on  day when 
betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday.”

“Oh, n we have three days yet,” said Holmes with a yawn. “That is
very fortunate, as have one or two matters of importance look into
just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for 
present?”

“Certainly. You will find me at  Langham under  name of  Count
Von Kramm.”

“n shall drop you a line let you know how we progress.”

“Pray do so. shall be all anxiety.”

“n, as money?”

“You have _carte blanche_.”

“Absolutely?”

“tell you that would give one of  provinces of my kingdom to
have that photograph.”

“ for present expenses?”

 King took a heavy chamolear bag from under hcloak  laid
it on  table.

“re are three hundred pounds in gold  seven hundred in notes,” he
said.

Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of hnote-book  hed it
him.

“ Mademoiselle’s address?” he asked.

“Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John’s Wood.”

Holmes took a note of it. “One or question,” said he. “Was 
photograph a cabinet?”

“It was.”

“n, good-night, your Majesty,  trust that we shall soon have
some good news for you.  good-night, Watson,” he added, as 
wheels of  royal brougham rolled down  street. “If you will be
good enough call to-morrow afternoon at three o’clock should like
chat thlittle matter over with you.”


II.

At three o’clock precisely was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not
yet returned.  llady informed me that he had left  house
shortly after eight o’clock in  morning. sat down beside  fire,
however, with  intention of awaiting him, however long he might be.
was already deeply interested in hinquiry, for, though it was
surrounded by none of  grim  strange features which were
associated with  two crimes which have already recorded, still,
 nature of  case   exalted station of hclient gave it a
character of its own. Indeed, apart from  nature of 
investigation which my friend had on h, re was something in his
masterly grasp of a situation,  hkeen, incisive reasoning, which
made it a pleasure me study hsystem of work,  follow 
quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled  most inextricable
mysteries. So accustomed was hinvariable success that  very
possibility of hfailing had ceased enter inmy head.

It was close upon four before  door opened,  a drunken-looking
groom, ill-kempt  side-whiskered, with an inflamed face 
disreputable clos, walked in room. Accustomed as was my
friend’s amazing powers in  use of disguises, had look three
times before was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he
vanished in bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes
tweed-suited  respectable, as of old. Putting hhs inhis
pockets, he stretched out hlegs in front of  fire  laughed
heartily for some minutes.

“Well, really!” he cried,  n he choked  laughed again until he
was obliged lie back, limp  helpless, in  chair.

“What it?”

“It’s quite too funny. am sure you could never guess how employed
my morning, or what ended by doing.”

“can’t imagine. suppose that you have been watching  habits, 
perhaps  house, of Miss Irene Adler.”

“Quite so; but  sequel was rar unusual. will tell you, however.
left  house a little after eight o’clock thmorning in 
character of a groom out of work. re a wonderful sympathy 
freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of m,  you will know all
that re know. soon found Briony Lodge. It a _bijou_
villa, with a garden at  back, but built out in front right up to
 road, two stories. Chubb lock  door. Large sitting-room on
 right side, well furnished, with long windows almost  floor,
 those preposterous English window fasteners which a child could
open. Behind re was nothing remarkable, save that  passage window
could be reached from  top of  coach-house. walked round it 
examined it closely from every point of view, but without noting
anything else of interest.

“n lounged down  street  found, as expected, that re
was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of  garden. lent
 ostlers a h in rubbing down ir horses,  received in
exchange twopence, a glass of half--half, two fills of shag tobacco,
 as much information as could desire about Miss Adler, say
nothing of half a dozen or people in  neighbourhood in whom was
not in  least interested, but whose biographies was compelled to
listen to.”

“ what of Irene Adler?” asked.

“Oh, she has turned all  men’s heads down in that part. She 
daintiest thing under a bonnet on thplanet. So say 
Serpentine-mews, a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drives
out at five every day,  returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldom
goes out at or times, except when she sings. Has only one male
visitor, but a good deal of him. He dark, hsome,  dashing,
never calls less than once a day,  often twice. He a Mr. Godfrey
Norton, of  Inner Temple. See  advantages of a cabman as a
confidant. y had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews,
 knew all about him. When had listened all y had tell, I
began walk up  down near Briony Lodge once more,  think
over my plan of campaign.

“ThGodfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in  matter.
He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was  relation between
m,  what  object of hrepeated visits? Was she hclient,
hfriend, or hmistress? If  former, she had probably
transferred  photograph hkeeping. If  latter, it was less
likely. On  issue of thquestion depended wher should
continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention 
gentleman’s chambers in  Temple. It was a delicate point,  it
widened  field of my inquiry. fear that bore you with se
details, but have let you see my little difficulties, if you are
underst  situation.”

“am following you closely,” answered.

“was still balancing  matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up
Briony Lodge,  a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkably
hsome man, dark, aquiline,  moustached—evidently  man of whom
had heard. He appeared be in a great hurry, shouted  cabman
wait,  brushed past  maid who opened  door with  air of
a man who was thoroughly at home.

“He was in  house about half an hour,  could catch glimpses of
him in  windows of  sitting-room, pacing up  down, talking
excitedly,  waving harms. Of her could see nothing. Presently
he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped up to
 cab, he pulled a gold watch from hpocket  looked at it
earnestly, ‘Drive like  devil,’ he shouted, ‘first Gross &
Hankey’s in Regent Street,  n  Church of St. Monica in 
Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!’

“Away y went,  was just wondering wher should not do well
follow m when up  lane came a neat little lau,  coachman
with hcoat only half-buttoned,  htie under hear, while all
 tags of hharness were sticking out of  buckles. It hadn’t
pulled up before she shot out of  hall door  init. only
caught a glimpse of her at  moment, but she was a lovely woman, with
a face that a man might die for.

“‘ Church of St. Monica, John,’ she cried, ‘ half a sovereign if
you reach it in twenty minutes.’

“Thwas quite too good lose, Watson. was just balancing wher
should run for it, or wher should perch behind her lau when a
cab came through  street.  driver looked twice at such a shabby
fare, but jumped in before he could object. ‘ Church of St.
Monica,’ said I, ‘ half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty
minutes.’ It was twenty-five minutes twelve,  of course it was
clear enough what was in  wind.

“My cabby drove fast. don’t think ever drove faster, but  ors
were re before us.  cab   lau with ir steaming horses
were in front of  door when arrived. paid  man  hurried
in church. re was not a soul re save  two whom had
followed  a surpliced clergyman, who seemed be expostulating with
m. y were all three sting in a knot in front of  altar. I
lounged up  side aisle like any or idler who has dropped ina
church. Suddenly, my surprise,  three at  altar faced round to
me,  Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.

“‘Thank God,’ he cried. ‘You’ll do. Come! Come!’

“‘What n?’ asked.

“‘Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won’t be legal.’

“was half-dragged up  altar,  before knew where was I
found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, 
vouching for things of which knew nothing,  generally assisting in
 secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, Godfrey Norton,
bachelor. It was all done in an instant,  re was  gentleman
thanking me on  one side   lady on  or, while 
clergyman beamed on me in front. It was  most preposterous position
in which ever found myself in my life,  it was  thought of it
that started me laughing just now. It seems that re had been some
informality about ir license, that  clergyman absolutely refused
marry m without a witness of some sort,  that my lucky
appearance saved  bridegroom from having sally out in
streets in search of a best man.  bride gave me a sovereign,  I
mean wear it on my watch chain in memory of  occasion.”

“Tha very unexpected turn of affairs,” said I; “ what n?”

“Well, found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if 
pair might take an immediate departure,  so necessitate very prompt
 energetic measures on my part. At  church door, however, y
separated, he driving back  Temple,  she her own house. ‘I
shall drive out in  park at five as usual,’ she said as she left
him. heard no more. y drove away in different directions,  I
went off make my own arrangements.”

“Which are?”

“Some cold beef  a glass of beer,” he answered, ringing  bell. “I
have been too busy think of food,  am likely be busier still
thevening. By  way, Doctor, shall want your co-operation.”

“shall be delighted.”

“You don’t mind breaking  law?”

“Not in  least.”

“Nor running a chance of arrest?”

“Not in a good cause.”

“Oh,  cause excellent!”

“n am your man.”

“was sure that might rely on you.”

“But what it you wish?”

“When Mrs. Turner has brought in  tray will make it clear you.
Now,” he said as he turned hungrily on  simple fare that our
llady had provided, “must discuss it while eat, for have not
much time. It nearly five now. In two hours we must be on  scene
of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rar, returns from her drive at
seven. We must be at Briony Lodge meet her.”

“ what n?”

“You must leave that me. have already arranged what occur.
re only one point on which must insist. You must not interfere,
come what may. You underst?”

“am be neutral?”

“do nothing whatever. re will probably be some small
unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed
in house. Four or five minutes afterwards  sitting-room window
will open. You are station yourself close that open window.”

“Yes.”

“You are watch me, for will be visible you.”

“Yes.”

“ when raise my h—so—you will throw in room what give
you throw,  will, at  same time, raise  cry of fire. You
quite follow me?”

“Entirely.”

“It nothing very formidable,” he said, taking a long cigar-shaped
roll from hpocket. “It an ordinary plumber’s smoke-rocket, fitted
with a cap at eir end make it self-lighting. Your task is
confined that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up
by quite a number of people. You may n walk  end of 
street,  will rejoin you in ten minutes. hope that have made
myself clear?”

“am remain neutral, get near  window, watch you,  at
 signal throw in thobject, n raise  cry of fire, 
wait you at  corner of  street.”

“Precisely.”

“n you may entirely rely on me.”

“That excellent. think, perhaps, it almost time that prepare
for  new role have play.”

He disappeared inhbedroom  returned in a few minutes in 
character of an amiable  simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. His
broad black hat, hbaggy trousers, hwhite tie, hsympatic
smile,  general look of peering  benevolent curiosity were such
as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely that
Holmes changed hcostume. Hexpression, hmanner, hvery soul
seemed vary with every fresh part that he assumed.  stage lost a
fine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a
specialist in crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street,  it still
wanted ten minutes  hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine
Avenue. It was already dusk,   lamps were just being lighted as
we paced up  down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for  coming
of its occupant.  house was just such as had pictured it from
Sherlock Holmes’ succinct description, but  locality appeared be
less private than expected. On  contrary, for a small street in a
quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. re was a group of
shabbily dressed men smoking  laughing in a corner, a
scissors-grinder with hwheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a
nurse-girl,  several well-dressed young men who were lounging up 
down with cigars in ir mouths.

“You see,” remarked Holmes, as we paced  fro in front of 
house, “thmarriage rar simplifies matters.  photograph becomes
a double-edged weapon now.  chances are that she would be as averse
its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client its coming
 eyes of hprincess. Now  question is, Where are we find
 photograph?”

“Where, indeed?”

“It most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It cabinet
size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress. She knows
that  King capable of having her waylaid  searched. Two
attempts of  sort have already been made. We may take it, n, that
she does not carry it about with her.”

“Where, n?”

“Her banker or her lawyer. re that double possibility. But am
inclined think neir. Women are naturally secretive,  y like
do ir own secreting. Why should she h it over anyone else?
She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell what
indirect or political influence might be brought bear upon a
business man. Besides, remember that she had resolved use it within
a few days. It must be where she can lay her hs upon it. It must be
in her own house.”

“But it has twice been burgled.”

“Pshaw! y did not know how look.”

“But how will you look?”

“will not look.”

“What n?”

“will get her show me.”

“But she will refuse.”

“She will not be able to. But hear  rumble of wheels. It her
carriage. Now carry out my orders  letter.”

As he spoke  gleam of  sidelights of a carriage came round 
curve of  avenue. It was a smart little lau which rattled up to
 door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of  loafing men at
 corner dashed forward open  door in  hope of earning a
copper, but was elbowed away by anor loafer, who had rushed up with
 same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by
 two guardsmen, who took sides with one of  loungers,  by 
scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon  or side. A blow was
struck,  in an instant  lady, who had stepped from her carriage,
was  centre of a little knot of flushed  struggling men, who
struck savagely at each or with ir fists  sticks. Holmes
dashed in crowd protect  lady; but, just as he reached her,
he gave a cry  dropped  ground, with  blood running freely
down hface. At hfall  guardsmen took ir heels in one
direction   loungers in  or, while a number of better
dressed people, who had watched  scuffle without taking part in it,
crowded in help  lady  attend  injured man. Irene
Adler, as will still call her, had hurried up  steps; but she
stood at  top with her superb figure outlined against  lights of
 hall, looking back in street.

“ poor gentleman much hurt?” she asked.

“He dead,” cried several voices.

“No, no, re’s life in him!” shouted anor. “But he’ll be gone
before you can get him hospital.”

“He’s a brave fellow,” said a woman. “y would have had  lady’s
purse  watch if it hadn’t been for him. y were a gang,  a
rough one, too. Ah, he’s breathing now.”

“He can’t lie in  street. May we bring him in, marm?”

“Surely. Bring him in sitting-room. re a comfortable sofa.
Thway, please!”

Slowly  solemnly he was borne inBriony Lodge  laid out in 
principal room, while still observed  proceedings from my post by
 window.  lamps had been lit, but  blinds had not been drawn,
so that could see Holmes as he lay upon  couch. do not know
wher he was seized with compunction at that moment for  part he
was playing, but know that never felt more heartily ashamed of
myself in my life than when saw  beautiful creature against whom I
was conspiring, or  grace  kindliness with which she waited upon
 injured man.  yet it would be  blackest treachery Holmes
draw back now from  part which he had intrusted me. hardened
my heart,  took  smoke-rocket from under my ulster. After all, I
thought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventing her from
injuring anor.

Holmes had sat up upon  couch,  saw him motion like a man who
in need of air. A maid rushed across  threw open  window. At
 same instant saw him raise hh  at  signal tossed my
rocket in room with a cry of “Fire!”  word was no sooner out
of my mouth than  whole crowd of spectators, well dressed 
ill—gentlemen, ostlers,  servant maids—joined in a general shriek of
“Fire!” Thick clouds of smoke curled through  room  out at 
open window. caught a glimpse of rushing figures,  a moment later
 voice of Holmes from within assuring m that it was a false
alarm. Slipping through  shouting crowd made my way  corner
of  street,  in ten minutes was rejoiced find my friend’s arm
in mine,  get away from  scene of uproar. He walked swiftly
 in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of 
quiet streets which lead towards  Edgeware Road.

“You did it very nicely, Doctor,” he remarked. “Nothing could have been
better. It all right.”

“You have  photograph?”

“know where it is.”

“ how did you find out?”

“She showed me, as told you she would.”

“am still in  dark.”

“do not wish make a mystery,” said he, laughing. “ matter was
perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in  street was
an accomplice. y were all engaged for  evening.”

“guessed as much.”

“n, when  row broke out, had a little moist red paint in 
palm of my h. rushed forward, fell down, clapped my h my
face,  became a piteous spectacle. It an old trick.”

“That also could fathom.”

“n y carried me in. She was bound have me in. What else could
she do?  inher sitting-room, which was  very room which I
suspected. It lay between that  her bedroom,  was determined to
see which. y laid me on a couch, motioned for air, y were
compelled open  window,  you had your chance.”

“How did that help you?”

“It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house on fire,
her instinct at once rush  thing which she values most. It
a perfectly overpowering impulse,  have more than once taken
advantage of it. In  case of  Darlington Substitution Scal it
was of use me,  also in  Arnsworth Castle business. A married
woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box.
Now it was clear me that our lady of to-day had nothing in  house
more precious her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to
secure it.  alarm of fire was admirably done.  smoke  shouting
were enough shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. 
photograph in a recess behind a sliding panel just above  right
bell-pull. She was re in an instant,  caught a glimpse of it as
she half drew it out. When cried out that it was a false alarm, she
replaced it, glanced at  rocket, rushed from  room,  have
not seen her since. rose, , making my excuses, escaped from 
house. hesitated wher attempt secure  photograph at once;
but  coachman had come in,  as he was watching me narrowly, it
seemed safer wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all.”

“ now?” asked.

“Our quest practically finished. shall call with  King
to-morrow,  with you, if you care come with us. We will be shown
in sitting-room wait for  lady, but it probable that
when she comes she may find neir us nor  photograph. It might be
a satisfaction hMajesty regain it with hown hs.”

“ when will you call?”

“At eight in  morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a
clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for thmarriage may mean a
complete change in her life  habits. must wire  King without
delay.”

We had reached Baker Street  had stopped at  door. He was
searching hpockets for  key when someone passing said:

“Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes.”

re were several people on  pavement at  time, but  greeting
appeared come from a slim youth in an ulster who had hurried by.

“I’ve heard that voice before,” said Holmes, staring down  dimly lit
street. “Now, wonder who  deuce that could have been.”


III.

slept at Baker Street that night,  we were engaged upon our toast
 coffee in  morning when  King of Bohemia rushed in
room.

“You have really got it!” he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by eir
shoulder  looking eagerly inhface.

“Not yet.”

“But you have hopes?”

“have hopes.”

“n, come. am all impatience be gone.”

“We must have a cab.”

“No, my brougham waiting.”

“n that will simplify matters.” We descended  started off once
more for Briony Lodge.

“Irene Adler married,” remarked Holmes.

“Married! When?”

“Yesterday.”

“But whom?”

“an English lawyer named Norton.”

“But she could not love him.”

“am in hopes that she does.”

“ why in hopes?”

“Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. If
 lady loves her husb, she does not love your Majesty. If she does
not love your Majesty, re no reason why she should interfere with
your Majesty’s plan.”

“It true.  yet—! Well! wish she had been of my own station!
What a queen she would have made!” He relapsed ina moody silence,
which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.

 door of Briony Lodge was open,  an elderly woman stood upon 
steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from 
brougham.

“Mr. Sherlock Holmes, believe?” said she.

“am Mr. Holmes,” answered my companion, looking at her with a
questioning  rar startled gaze.

“Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely call. She left
thmorning with her husb by  5:15 train from Charing Cross for
 Continent.”

“What!” Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin 
surprise. “Do you mean that she has left Engl?”

“Never return.”

“  papers?” asked  King hoarsely. “All lost.”

“We shall see.” He pushed past  servant  rushed in
drawing-room, followed by  King  myself.  furniture was
scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves  open
drawers, as if  lady had hurriedly ransacked m before her flight.
Holmes rushed at  bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, ,
plunging in hh, pulled out a photograph  a letter. 
photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress,  letter was
superscribed “Sherlock Holmes, Esq. be left till called for.” My
friend tore it open,  we all three read it toger. It was dated at
midnight of  preceding night  ran in thway:

    “MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—You really did it very well. You took
    me in completely. Until after  alarm of fire, had not a
    suspicion. But n, when found how had betrayed myself, I
    began think. had been warned against you months ago. had
    been told that, if  King employed an agent, it would certainly
    be you.  your address had been given me. Yet, with all this, you
    made me reveal what you wanted know. Even after became
    suspicious, found it hard think evil of such a dear, kind old
    clergyman. But, you know, have been trained as an actress myself.
    Male costume nothing new me. often take advantage of 
    freedom which it gives. sent John,  coachman, watch you,
    ran upstairs, got inmy walking clos, as call m,  came
    down just as you departed.

    “Well, followed you your door,  so made sure that was
    really an object of interest  celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
    n I, rar imprudently, wished you good-night,  started for
     Temple see my husb.

    “We both thought  best resource was flight, when pursued by so
    formidable an antagonist; so you will find  nest empty when you
    call to-morrow. As  photograph, your client may rest in
    peace. love  am loved by a better man than he.  King may do
    what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly
    wronged. keep it only safeguard myself,  preserve a
    weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might
    take in  future. leave a photograph which he might care to
    possess;  remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,


    “Very truly yours,

    “IRENE NORTON, _née_ ADLER.”


“What a woman—oh, what a woman!” cried  King of Bohemia, when we had
all three read thepistle. “Did not tell you how quick  resolute
she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? it not a pity
that she was not on my level?”

“From what have seen of  lady, she seems, indeed, be on a very
different level your Majesty,” said Holmes coldly. “am sorry that
have not been able bring your Majesty’s business a more
successful conclusion.”

“On  contrary, my dear sir,” cried  King; “nothing could be more
successful. know that her word inviolate.  photograph now as
safe as if it were in  fire.”

“am glad hear your Majesty say so.”

“am immensely indebted you. Pray tell me in what way can reward
you. Thring—” He slipped an emerald snake ring from hfinger 
held it out upon  palm of hh.

“Your Majesty has something which should value even more highly,”
said Holmes.

“You have but name it.”

“Thphotograph!”

 King stared at him in amazement.

“Irene’s photograph!” he cried. “Certainly, if you wish it.”

“thank your Majesty. n re no more be done in  matter.
have  honour wish you a very good morning.” He bowed, ,
turning away without observing  h which  King had stretched
out him, he set off in my company for hchambers.

 that was how a great scal threatened affect  kingdom of
Bohemia,  how  best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by a
woman’s wit. He used make merry over  cleverness of women, but I
have not heard him do it of late.  when he speaks of Irene Adler, or
when he refers her photograph, it always under  honourable
title of __ woman.



II.  RED-HEADED LEAGUE


 had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in 
 autumn of last year  found him in deep conversation with a very
 stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an
 apology for my intrusion, was about withdraw when Holmes pulled
 me abruptly in room  closed  door behind me.

“You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,” he
said cordially.

“was afraid that you were engaged.”

“So am. Very much so.”

“n can wait in  next room.”

“Not at all. Thgentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner  helper
in many of my most successful cases,  have no doubt that he will
be of  utmost use me in yours also.”

 stout gentleman half rose from hchair  gave a bob of
greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from hsmall
fat-encircled eyes.

“Try  settee,” said Holmes, relapsing inharmchair  putting
hfingertips toger, as was hcustom when in judicial moods. “I
know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that bizarre 
outside  conventions  humdrum routine of everyday life. You have
shown your relish for it by  enthusiasm which has prompted you to
chronicle, , if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat embellish
so many of my own little adventures.”

“Your cases have indeed been of  greatest interest me,” I
observed.

“You will remember that remarked  or day, just before we went
in very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Surl, that
for strange effects  extraordinary combinations we must go life
itself, which always far more daring than any effort of 
imagination.”

“A proposition which took  liberty of doubting.”

“You did, Doctor, but none  less you must come round my view, for
orwise shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your
reason breaks down under m  acknowledges me be right. Now, Mr.
Jabez Wilson here has been good enough call upon me thmorning,
 begin a narrative which promises be one of  most singular
which have listened for some time. You have heard me remark that
 strangest  most unique things are very often connected not with
 larger but with  smaller crimes,  occasionally, indeed, where
re room for doubt wher any positive crime has been committed.
As far as have heard, it impossible for me say wher 
present case an instance of crime or not, but  course of events
certainly among  most singular that have ever listened to.
Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have  great kindness recommence
your narrative. ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson has
not heard  opening part but also because  peculiar nature of 
story makes me anxious have every possible detail from your lips. As
a rule, when have heard some slight indication of  course of
events, am able guide myself by  thouss of or similar
cases which occur my memory. In  present instance am forced to
admit that  facts are,  best of my belief, unique.”

 portly client puffed out hchest with an appearance of some
little pride  pulled a dirty  wrinkled newspaper from  inside
pocket of hgreatcoat. As he glanced down  advertisement column,
with hhead thrust forward   paper flattened out upon hknee,
took a good look at  man  endeavoured, after  fashion of my
companion, read  indications which might be presented by his
dress or appearance.

did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore
every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,
pompous,  slow. He wore rar baggy grey shepherd’s check trousers,
a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in  front,  a drab
waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain,  a square pierced bit of
metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat  a faded brown
overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.
Altoger, look as would, re was nothing remarkable about  man
save hblazing red head,   expression of extreme chagrin 
discontent upon hfeatures.

Sherlock Holmes’ quick eye took in my occupation,  he shook hhead
with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. “Beyond  obvious
facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff,
that he a Freemason, that he has been in China,  that he has done
a considerable amount of writing lately, can deduce nothing else.”

Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in hchair, with hforefinger upon 
paper, but heyes upon my companion.

“How, in  name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?”
he asked. “How did you know, for example, that did manual labour.
It’s as true as gospel, for began as a ship’s carpenter.”

“Your hs, my dear sir. Your right h quite a size larger than
your left. You have worked with it,   muscles are more
developed.”

“Well,  snuff, n,   Freemasonry?”

“won’t insult your intelligence by telling you how read that,
especially as, rar against  strict rules of your order, you use
an arc--compass breastpin.”

“Ah, of course, forgot that. But  writing?”

“What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five
inches,   left one with  smooth patch near  elbow where you
rest it upon  desk?”

“Well, but China?”

“ fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist
could only have been done in China. have made a small study of tattoo
marks  have even contributed  literature of  subject. That
trick of staining  fishes’ scales of a delicate pink quite
peculiar China. When, in addition, see a Chinese coin hanging from
your watch-chain,  matter becomes even more simple.”

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. “Well, never!” said he. “thought
at first that you had done something clever, but see that re was
nothing in it after all.”

“begin think, Watson,” said Holmes, “that make a mistake in
explaining. ‘_Omne ignotum pro magnifico_,’ you know,  my poor
little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if am so
cid. Can you not find  advertisement, Mr. Wilson?”

“Yes, have got it now,” he answered with hthick red finger planted
halfway down  column. “Here it is. Thwhat began it all. You
just read it for yourself, sir.”

took  paper from him  read as follows:

“ RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of  bequest of  late
Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., re now anor
vacancy open which entitles a member of  League a salary of £ 4 a
week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound in
body  mind  above  age of twenty-one years, are eligible.
Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o’clock, Duncan Ross, at 
offices of  League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet Street.”


“What on earth does thmean?” ejaculated after had twice read
over  extraordinary announcement.

Holmes chuckled  wriggled in hchair, as was hhabit when in
high spirits. “It a little off  beaten track, isn’t it?” said he.
“ now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch  tell us all about
yourself, your household,   effect which thadvertisement had
upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of  paper
  date.”

“It _ Morning Chronicle_ of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago.”

“Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?”

“Well, it just as have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,”
said Jabez Wilson, mopping hforehead; “have a small pawnbroker’s
business at Coburg Square, near  City. It’s not a very large affair,
 of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I
used be able keep two assistants, but now only keep one;  I
would have a job pay him but that he willing come for half
wages so as learn  business.”

“What  name of thobliging youth?” asked Sherlock Holmes.

“Hname Vincent Spaulding,  he’s not such a youth, eir. It’s
hard say hage. should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;
 know very well that he could better himself  earn twice what I
am able give him. But, after all, if he satisfied, why should I
put ideas in hhead?”

“Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an _employé_ who comes
under  full market price. It not a common experience among
employers in thage. don’t know that your assistant not as
remarkable as your advertisement.”

“Oh, he has hfaults, too,” said Mr. Wilson. “Never was such a fellow
for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought be
improving hmind,  n diving down in cellar like a rabbit
inits hole develop hpictures. That hmain fault, but on
 whole he’s a good worker. re’s no vice in him.”

“He still with you, presume?”

“Yes, sir. He  a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple cooking
 keeps  place clean—that’s all have in  house, for am a
widower  never had any family. We live very quietly, sir,  three
of us;  we keep a roof over our heads  pay our debts, if we do
nothing more.

“ first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, he
came down in office just thday eight weeks, with thvery
paper in hh,  he says:

“‘wish  Lord, Mr. Wilson, that was a red-headed man.’

“‘Why that?’ asks.

“‘Why,’ says he, ‘here’s anor vacancy on  League of 
Red-headed Men. It’s worth quite a little fortune any man who gets
it,  underst that re are more vacancies than re are men,
so that  trustees are at ir wits’ end what do with  money.
If my hair would only change colour, here’s a nice little crib all
ready for me step into.’

“‘Why, what it, n?’ asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, am a very
stay-at-home man,  as my business came me instead of my having to
go it, was often weeks on end without putting my foot over 
door-mat. In that way didn’t know much of what was going on outside,
 was always glad of a bit of news.

“‘Have you never heard of  League of  Red-headed Men?’ he asked
with heyes open.

“‘Never.’

“‘Why, wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of 
vacancies.’

“‘ what are y worth?’ asked.

“‘Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but  work slight,  it
need not interfere very much with one’s or occupations.’

“Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for 
business has not been over good for some years,  an extra couple of
hundred would have been very hy.

“‘Tell me all about it,’ said I.

“‘Well,’ said he, showing me  advertisement, ‘you can see for
yourself that  League has a vacancy,  re  address where
you should apply for particulars. As far as can make out,  League
was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very
peculiar in hways. He was himself red-headed,  he had a great
sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he
had left henormous fortune in  hs of trustees, with
instructions apply  interest  providing of easy berths to
men whose hair of that colour. From all hear it splendid pay
 very little do.’

“‘But,’ said I, ‘re would be millions of red-headed men who would
apply.’

“‘Not so many as you might think,’ he answered. ‘You see it really
confined Londoners,  grown men. ThAmerican had started from
London when he was young,  he wanted do  old town a good turn.
n, again, have heard it no use your applying if your hair is
light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fiery
red. Now, if you cared apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;
but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while put yourself out of
 way for  sake of a few hundred pounds.’

“Now, it a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that my
hair of a very full  rich tint, so that it seemed me that if
re was be any competition in  matter stood as good a chance
as any man that had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed know so
much about it that thought he might prove useful, so just ordered
him put up  shutters for  day  come right away with me.
He was very willing have a holiday, so we shut  business up 
started off for  address that was given us in  advertisement.

“never hope see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From
north, south, east,  west every man who had a shade of red in his
hair had tramped in city answer  advertisement. Fleet
Street was choked with red-headed folk,  Pope’s Court looked like a
coster’s orange barrow. should not have thought re were so many in
 whole country as were brought toger by that single
advertisement. Every shade of colour y were—straw, lemon, orange,
brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, re were
not many who had  real vivid flame-coloured tint. When saw how
many were waiting, would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding
would not hear of it. How he did it could not imagine, but he pushed
 pulled  butted until he got me through  crowd,  right up
 steps which led  office. re was a double stream upon
 stair, some going up in hope,  some coming back dejected; but we
wedged in as well as we could  soon found ourselves in  office.”

“Your experience has been a most entertaining one,” remarked Holmes as
hclient paused  refreshed hmemory with a huge pinch of snuff.
“Pray continue your very interesting statement.”

“re was nothing in  office but a couple of wooden chairs  a
deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even
redder than mine. He said a few words each cidate as he came up,
 n he always managed find some fault in m which would
disqualify m. Getting a vacancy did not seem be such a very easy
matter, after all. However, when our turn came  little man was much
more favourable me than any of  ors,  he closed  door
as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.

“‘ThMr. Jabez Wilson,’ said my assistant, ‘ he willing to
fill a vacancy in  League.’

“‘ he admirably suited for it,’  or answered. ‘He has every
requirement. cannot recall when have seen anything so fine.’ He
took a step backward, cocked hhead on one side,  gazed at my hair
until felt quite bashful. n suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my
h,  congratulated me warmly on my success.

“‘It would be injustice hesitate,’ said he. ‘You will, however, am
sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.’ With that he seized
my hair in both hhs,  tugged until yelled with  pain.
‘re water in your eyes,’ said he as he released me. ‘perceive
that all as it should be. But we have be careful, for we have
twice been deceived by wigs  once by paint. could tell you tales
of cobbler’s wax which would disgust you with human nature.’ He stepped
over  window  shouted through it at  top of hvoice that
 vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below,
  folk all trooped away in different directions until re was
not a red-head be seen except my own  that of  manager.

“‘My name,’ said he, ‘Mr. Duncan Ross,  am myself one of 
pensioners upon  fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a
married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?’

“answered that had not.

“Hface fell immediately.

“‘Dear me!’ he said gravely, ‘that very serious indeed! am sorry
hear you say that.  fund was, of course, for  propagation 
spread of  red-heads as well as for ir maintenance. It is
exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.’

“My face lengned at this, Mr. Holmes, for thought that was not
have  vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a few
minutes he said that it would be all right.

“‘In  case of anor,’ said he, ‘ objection might be fatal, but
we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair as
yours. When shall you be able enter upon your new duties?’

“‘Well, it a little awkward, for have a business already,’ said I.

“‘Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!’ said Vincent Spaulding. ‘I
should be able look after that for you.’

“‘What would be  hours?’ asked.

“‘Ten two.’

“Now a pawnbroker’s business mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes,
especially Thursday  Friday evening, which just before pay-day;
so it would suit me very well earn a little in  mornings.
Besides, knew that my assistant was a good man,  that he would see
anything that turned up.

“‘That would suit me very well,’ said I. ‘  pay?’

“‘£ 4 a week.’

“‘  work?’

“‘purely nominal.’

“‘What do you call purely nominal?’

“‘Well, you have be in  office, or at least in  building, 
whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. 
will very clear upon that point. You don’t comply with 
conditions if you budge from  office during that time.’

“‘It’s only four hours a day,  should not think of leaving,’ said
I.

“‘No excuse will avail,’ said Mr. Duncan Ross; ‘neir sickness nor
business nor anything else. re you must stay, or you lose your
billet.’

“‘  work?’

“‘copy out  _Encyclopædia Britannica_. re  first
volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, 
blotting-paper, but we provide thtable  chair. Will you be ready
to-morrow?’

“‘Certainly,’ answered.

“‘n, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson,  let me congratulate you once
more on  important position which you have been fortunate enough to
gain.’ He bowed me out of  room  went home with my assistant,
hardly knowing what say or do, was so pleased at my own good
fortune.

“Well, thought over  matter all day,  by evening was in low
spirits again; for had quite persuaded myself that  whole affair
must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I
could not imagine. It seemed altoger past belief that anyone could
make such a will, or that y would pay such a sum for doing anything
so simple as copying out  _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Vincent
Spaulding did what he could cheer me up, but by bedtime had
reasoned myself out of  whole thing. However, in  morning I
determined have a look at it anyhow, so bought a penny bottle of
ink,  with a quill-pen,  seven sheets of foolscap paper, I
started off for Pope’s Court.

“Well, my surprise  delight, everything was as right as possible.
 table was set out ready for me,  Mr. Duncan Ross was re to
see that got fairly work. He started me off upon  letter A, 
n he left me; but he would drop in from time time see that all
was right with me. At two o’clock he bade me good-day, complimented me
upon  amount that had written,  locked  door of  office
after me.

“Thwent on day after day, Mr. Holmes,  on Saturday  manager
came in  planked down four golden sovereigns for my week’s work. It
was  same next week,   same  week after. Every morning I
was re at ten,  every afternoon left at two. By degrees Mr.
Duncan Ross took coming in only once of a morning,  n, after a
time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, never dared to
leave  room for an instant, for was not sure when he might come,
  billet was such a good one,  suited me so well, that would
not risk  loss of it.

“Eight weeks passed away like this,  had written about Abbots 
Archery  Armour  Architecture  Attica,  hoped with
diligence that might get on  B’s before very long. It cost me
something in foolscap,  had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my
writings.  n suddenly  whole business came an end.”

“an end?”

“Yes, sir.  no later than thmorning. went my work as usual
at ten o’clock, but  door was shut  locked, with a little square
of cardboard hammered on  middle of  panel with a tack. Here
it is,  you can read for yourself.”

He held up a piece of white cardboard about  size of a sheet of
note-paper. It read in thfashion:

“ RED-HEADED LEAGUE DISSOLVED. October 9, 1890.”


Sherlock Holmes  surveyed thcurt announcement   rueful
face behind it, until  comical side of  affair so completely
overtopped every or consideration that we both burst out ina roar
of laughter.

“cannot see that re anything very funny,” cried our client,
flushing up  roots of hflaming head. “If you can do nothing
better than laugh at me, can go elsewhere.”

“No, no,” cried Holmes, shoving him back in chair from which he
had half risen. “really wouldn’t miss your case for  world. It is
most refreshingly unusual. But re is, if you will excuse my saying
so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you
take when you found  card upon  door?”

“was staggered, sir. did not know what do. n called at 
offices round, but none of m seemed know anything about it.
Finally, went  llord, who an accountant living on 
ground floor,  asked him if he could tell me what had become of
 Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such
body. n asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that 
name was new him.

“‘Well,’ said I, ‘ gentleman at No. 4.’

“‘What,  red-headed man?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘Oh,’ said he, ‘hname was William Morris. He was a solicitor 
was using my room as a temporary convenience until hnew premises
were ready. He moved out yesterday.’

“‘Where could find him?’

“‘Oh, at hnew offices. He did tell me  address. Yes, 17 King
Edward Street, near St. Paul’s.’

“started off, Mr. Holmes, but when got that address it was a
manufactory of artificial knee-caps,  no one in it had ever heard of
eir Mr. William Morror Mr. Duncan Ross.”

“ what did you do n?” asked Holmes.

“went home Saxe-Coburg Square,  took  advice of my
assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that
if waited should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,
Mr. Holmes. did not wish lose such a place without a struggle, so,
as had heard that you were good enough give advice poor folk
who were in need of it, came right away you.”

“ you did very wisely,” said Holmes. “Your case an exceedingly
remarkable one,  shall be happy look init. From what you
have told me think that it possible that graver issues hang from
it than might at first sight appear.”

“Grave enough!” said Mr. Jabez Wilson. “Why, have lost four pound a
week.”

“As far as you are personally concerned,” remarked Holmes, “do not
see that you have any grievance against thextraordinary league. On
 contrary, you are, as underst, richer by some £ 30, say
nothing of  minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject
which comes under  letter A. You have lost nothing by m.”

“No, sir. But want find out about m,  who y are,  what
ir object was in playing thprank—if it was a prank—upon me. It
was a pretty expensive joke for m, for it cost m two  thirty
pounds.”

“We shall endeavour clear up se points for you. , first, one
or two questions, Mr. Wilson. Thassistant of yours who first called
your attention  advertisement—how long had he been with you?”

“About a month n.”

“How did he come?”

“In answer an advertisement.”

“Was he  only applicant?”

“No, had a dozen.”

“Why did you pick him?”

“Because he was hy  would come cheap.”

“At half wages, in fact.”

“Yes.”

“What he like, thVincent Spaulding?”

“Small, stout-built, very quick in hways, no hair on hface,
though he’s not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his
forehead.”

Holmes sat up in hchair in considerable excitement. “thought as
much,” said he. “Have you ever observed that hears are pierced for
earrings?”

“Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a
lad.”

“Hum!” said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. “He still with
you?”

“Oh, yes, sir; have only just left him.”

“ has your business been attended in your absence?”

“Nothing complain of, sir. re’s never very much do of a
morning.”

“That will do, Mr. Wilson. shall be happy give you an opinion upon
 subject in  course of a day or two. To-day Saturday,  I
hope that by Monday we may come a conclusion.”

“Well, Watson,” said Holmes when our visitor had left us, “what do you
make of it all?”

“make nothing of it,” answered frankly. “It a most mysterious
business.”

“As a rule,” said Holmes, “ more bizarre a thing  less
mysterious it proves be. It your commonplace, featureless crimes
which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face  most
difficult identify. But must be prompt over thmatter.”

“What are you going do, n?” asked.

“smoke,” he answered. “It quite a three pipe problem,  beg
that you won’t speak me for fifty minutes.” He curled himself up in
hchair, with hthin knees drawn up hhawk-like nose, 
re he sat with heyes closed  hblack clay pipe thrusting out
like  bill of some strange bird. had come  conclusion that
he had dropped asleep,  indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly
sprang out of hchair with  gesture of a man who has made up his
mind  put hpipe down upon  mantelpiece.

“Sarasate plays at  St. James’s Hall thafternoon,” he remarked.
“What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few
hours?”

“have nothing do to-day. My practice never very absorbing.”

“n put on your hat  come. am going through  City first, 
we can have some lunch on  way. observe that re a good deal
of German music on  programme, which rar more my taste than
Italian or French. It introspective,  want introspect. Come
along!”

We travelled by  Underground as far as Aldersgate;  a short walk
took us Saxe-Coburg Square,  scene of  singular story which we
had listened in  morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel
place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked out
ina small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass  a few
clumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden
 uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls  a brown board with
“JABEZ WILSON” in white letters, upon a corner house, announced 
place where our red-headed client carried on hbusiness. Sherlock
Holmes stopped in front of it with hhead on one side  looked it
all over, with heyes shining brightly between puckered lids. n he
walked slowly up  street,  n down again  corner, still
looking keenly at  houses. Finally he returned  pawnbroker’s,
, having thumped vigorously upon  pavement with hstick two or
three times, he went up  door  knocked. It was instantly
opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to
step in.

“Thank you,” said Holmes, “only wished ask you how you would go
from here  Str.”

“Third right, fourth left,” answered  assistant promptly, closing
 door.

“Smart fellow, that,” observed Holmes as we walked away. “He is, in my
judgment,  fourth smartest man in London,  for daring am not
sure that he has not a claim be third. have known something of him
before.”

“Evidently,” said I, “Mr. Wilson’s assistant counts for a good deal in
thmystery of  Red-headed League. am sure that you inquired your
way merely in order that you might see him.”

“Not him.”

“What n?”

“ knees of htrousers.”

“ what did you see?”

“What expected see.”

“Why did you beat  pavement?”

“My dear doctor, tha time for observation, not for talk. We are
spies in an enemy’s country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.
Let us now explore  parts which lie behind it.”

 road in which we found ourselves as we turned round  corner from
 retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast it as
 front of a picture does  back. It was one of  main
arteries which conveyed  traffic of  City  north  west.
 roadway was blocked with  immense stream of commerce flowing in
a double tide inward  outward, while  footpaths were black with
 hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult realise as we
looked at  line of fine shops  stately business premises that
y really abutted on  or side upon  faded  stagnant
square which we had just quitted.

“Let me see,” said Holmes, sting at  corner  glancing along
 line, “should like just remember  order of  houses here.
It a hobby of mine have an exact knowledge of London. re is
Mortimer’s,  tobacconist,  little newspaper shop,  Coburg
branch of  City  Suburban Bank,  Vegetarian Restaurant, 
McFarlane’s carriage-building depot. That carries us right on 
or block.  now, Doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we had
some play. A swich  a cup of coffee,  n off violin-l,
where all sweetness  delicacy  harmony,  re are no
red-headed clients vex us with ir conundrums.”

My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very
capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All 
afternoon he sat in  stalls wrapped in  most perfect happiness,
gently waving hlong, thin fingers in time  music, while his
gently smiling face  hlanguid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those
of Holmes  sleuth-hound, Holmes  relentless, keen-witted,
ready-hed criminal agent, as it was possible conceive. In his
singular character  dual nature alternately asserted itself,  his
extreme exactness  astuteness represented, as have often thought,
 reaction against  poetic  contemplative mood which
occasionally predominated in him.  swing of hnature took him from
extreme languor devouring energy; , as knew well, he was never
so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in
harmchair amid himprovisations  hblack-letter editions.
n it was that  lust of  chase would suddenly come upon him,
 that hbrilliant reasoning power would rise  level of
intuition, until those who were unacquainted with hmethods would
look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of or
mortals. When saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in  music at St.
James’s Hall felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom
he had set himself hunt down.

“You want go home, no doubt, Doctor,” he remarked as we emerged.

“Yes, it would be as well.”

“ have some business do which will take some hours. This
business at Coburg Square serious.”

“Why serious?”

“A considerable crime in contemplation. have every reason to
believe that we shall be in time stop it. But to-day being Saturday
rar complicates matters. shall want your help to-night.”

“At what time?”

“Ten will be early enough.”

“shall be at Baker Street at ten.”

“Very well. , say, Doctor, re may be some little danger, so
kindly put your army revolver in your pocket.” He waved hh,
turned on hheel,  disappeared in an instant among  crowd.

trust that am not more dense than my neighbours, but was always
oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock
Holmes. Here had heard what he had heard, had seen what he had
seen,  yet from hwords it was evident that he saw clearly not
only what had happened but what was about happen, while me 
whole business was still confused  grotesque. As drove home my
house in Kensington thought over it all, from  extraordinary story
of  red-headed copier of  _Encyclopædia_ down  visit to
Saxe-Coburg Square,   ominous words with which he had parted from
me. What was thnocturnal expedition,  why should go armed?
Where were we going,  what were we do? had  hint from Holmes
that thsmooth-faced pawnbroker’s assistant was a formidable man—a
man who might play a deep game. tried puzzle it out, but gave it
up in despair  set  matter aside until night should bring an
explanation.

It was a quarter-past nine when started from home  made my way
across  Park,  so through Oxford Street Baker Street. Two
hansoms were sting at  door,  as entered  passage heard
 sound of voices from above. On entering hroom, found Holmes in
animated conversation with two men, one of whom recognised as Peter
Jones,  official police agent, while  or was a long, thin,
sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat  oppressively respectable
frock-coat.

“Ha! Our party complete,” said Holmes, buttoning up hpea-jacket
 taking hheavy hunting crop from  rack. “Watson, think you
know Mr. Jones, of Scotl Yard? Let me introduce you Mr.
Merrywear, who be our companion in to-night’s adventure.”

“We’re hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see,” said Jones in his
consequential way. “Our friend here a wonderful man for starting a
chase. All he wants an old dog help him do  running down.”

“hope a wild goose may not prove be  end of our chase,”
observed Mr. Merrywear gloomily.

“You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir,” said 
police agent loftily. “He has hown little methods, which are, if he
won’t mind my saying so, just a little too oretical  fantastic,
but he has  makings of a detective in him. It not too much say
that once or twice, as in that business of  Sholmurder  
Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than  official
force.”

“Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it all right,” said  stranger with
deference. “Still, confess that miss my rubber. It  first
Saturday night for seven--twenty years that have not had my
rubber.”

“think you will find,” said Sherlock Holmes, “that you will play for
a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet,  that  play
will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merrywear,  stake will be
some £ 30,000;  for you, Jones, it will be  man upon whom you
wish lay your hs.”

“John Clay,  murderer, thief, smasher,  forger. He’s a young man,
Mr. Merrywear, but he at  head of hprofession,  would
rar have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He’s a
remarkable man, young John Clay. Hgrfar was a royal duke,
 he himself has been Eton  Oxford. Hbrain as cunning as
hfingers,  though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never
know where find  man himself. He’ll crack a crib in Scotl one
week,  be raising money build an orphanage in Cornwall  next.
I’ve been on htrack for years  have never set eyes on him yet.”

“hope that may have  pleasure of introducing you to-night. I’ve
had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay,  agree with
you that he at  head of hprofession. It past ten, however,
 quite time that we started. If you two will take  first hansom,
Watson  will follow in  second.”

Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during  long drive 
lay back in  cab humming  tunes which he had heard in 
afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets
until we emerged inFarrington Street.

“We are close re now,” my friend remarked. “Thfellow Merrywear
a bank director,  personally interested in  matter. thought
it as well have Jones with us also. He not a bad fellow, though
an absolute imbecile in hprofession. He has one positive virtue. He
as brave as a bulldog  as tenacious as a lobster if he gets his
claws upon anyone. Here we are,  y are waiting for us.”

We had reached  same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found
ourselves in  morning. Our cabs were dismissed, , following 
guidance of Mr. Merrywear, we passed down a narrow passage 
through a side door, which he opened for us. Within re was a small
corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. Thalso was
opened,  led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated
at anor formidable gate. Mr. Merrywear stopped light a
lantern,  n conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, 
so, after opening a third door, ina huge vault or cellar, which was
piled all round with crates  massive boxes.

“You are not very vulnerable from above,” Holmes remarked as he held up
 lantern  gazed about him.

“Nor from below,” said Mr. Merrywear, striking hstick upon 
flags which lined  floor. “Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!” he
remarked, looking up in surprise.

“must really ask you be a little more quiet!” said Holmes
severely. “You have already imperilled  whole success of our
expedition. Might beg that you would have  goodness sit down
upon one of those boxes,  not interfere?”

 solemn Mr. Merrywear perched himself upon a crate, with a very
injured expression upon hface, while Holmes fell upon hknees upon
 floor , with  lantern  a magnifying lens, began examine
minutely  cracks between  stones. A few seconds sufficed to
satisfy him, for he sprang hfeet again  put hglass in his
pocket.

“We have at least an hour before us,” he remarked, “for y can hardly
take any steps until  good pawnbroker safely in bed. n y
will not lose a minute, for  sooner y do ir work  longer
time y will have for ir escape. We are at present, Doctor—as no
doubt you have divined—in  cellar of  City branch of one of 
principal London banks. Mr. Merrywear  chairman of directors,
 he will explain you that re are reasons why  more daring
criminals of London should take a considerable interest in thcellar
at present.”

“It our French gold,” whispered  director. “We have had several
warnings that an attempt might be made upon it.”

“Your French gold?”

“Yes. We had occasion some months ago strengn our resources 
borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from  Bank of France. It
has become known that we have never had occasion unpack  money,
 that it still lying in our cellar.  crate upon which sit
contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our
reserve of bullion much larger at present than usually kept in a
single branch office,   directors have had misgivings upon 
subject.”

“Which were very well justified,” observed Holmes. “ now it time
that we arranged our little plans. expect that within an hour matters
will come a head. In  meantime Mr. Merrywear, we must put 
screen over that dark lantern.”

“ sit in  dark?”

“am afraid so. had brought a pack of cards in my pocket,  I
thought that, as we were a _partie carrée_, you might have your rubber
after all. But see that  enemy’s preparations have gone so far
that we cannot risk  presence of a light. , first of all, we must
choose our positions. se are daring men,  though we shall take
m at a disadvantage, y may do us some harm unless we are careful.
shall st behind thcrate,  do you conceal yourselves behind
those. n, when flash a light upon m, close in swiftly. If y
fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting m down.”

placed my revolver, cocked, upon  top of  wooden case behind
which crouched. Holmes shot  slide across  front of hlantern
 left us in pitch darkness—such an absolute darkness as have never
before experienced.  smell of hot metal remained assure us that
 light was still re, ready flash out at a moment’s notice. To
me, with my nerves worked up a pitch of expectancy, re was
something depressing  subduing in  sudden gloom,  in  cold
dank air of  vault.

“y have but one retreat,” whispered Holmes. “That back through
 house inSaxe-Coburg Square. hope that you have done what I
asked you, Jones?”

“have an inspector  two officers waiting at  front door.”

“n we have stopped all  holes.  now we must be silent 
wait.”

What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an
hour  a quarter, yet it appeared me that  night must have
almost gone,   dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary 
stiff, for feared change my position; yet my nerves were worked up
 highest pitch of tension,  my hearing was so acute that I
could not only hear  gentle breathing of my companions, but could
distinguish  deeper, heavier in-breath of  bulky Jones from 
thin, sighing note of  bank director. From my position could look
over  case in  direction of  floor. Suddenly my eyes caught
 glint of a light.

At first it was but a lurid spark upon  stone pavement. n it
lengned out until it became a yellow line,  n, without any
warning or sound, a gash seemed open  a h appeared, a white,
almost womanly h, which felt about in  centre of  little area
of light. For a minute or more  h, with its writhing fingers,
protruded out of  floor. n it was withdrawn as suddenly as it
appeared,  all was dark again save  single lurid spark which
marked a chink between  stones.

Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing
sound, one of  broad, white stones turned over upon its side 
left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed  light of a
lantern. Over  edge re peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, which
looked keenly about it,  n, with a h on eir side of 
aperture, drew itself shoulder-high  waist-high, until one knee
rested upon  edge. In anor instant he stood at  side of 
hole  was hauling after him a companion, l small like
himself, with a pale face  a shock of very red hair.

“It’s all clear,” he whispered. “Have you  chisel   bags?
Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump,  I’ll swing for it!”

Sherlock Holmes had sprung out  seized  intruder by  collar.
 or dived down  hole,  heard  sound of rending cloth
as Jones clutched at hskirts.  light flashed upon  barrel of a
revolver, but Holmes’ hunting crop came down on  man’s wrist, 
 pistol clinked upon  stone floor.

“It’s no use, John Clay,” said Holmes blly. “You have no chance at
all.”

“So see,”  or answered with  utmost coolness. “fancy that
my pal all right, though see you have got hcoat-tails.”

“re are three men waiting for him at  door,” said Holmes.

“Oh, indeed! You seem have done  thing very completely. must
compliment you.”

“ you,” Holmes answered. “Your red-headed idea was very new 
effective.”

“You’ll see your pal again presently,” said Jones. “He’s quicker at
climbing down holes than am. Just hold out while fix  derbies.”

“beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hs,” remarked our
prisoner as  hcuffs clattered upon hwrists. “You may not be
aware that have royal blood in my veins. Have  goodness, also,
when you address me always say ‘sir’  ‘please.’”

“All right,” said Jones with a stare  a snigger. “Well, would you
please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab carry your
Highness  police-station?”

“That better,” said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to
 three of us  walked quietly off in  custody of  detective.

“Really, Mr. Holmes,” said Mr. Merrywear as we followed m from
 cellar, “do not know how  bank can thank you or repay you.
re no doubt that you have detected  defeated in  most
complete manner one of  most determined attempts at bank robbery
that have ever come within my experience.”

“have had one or two little scores of my own settle with Mr. John
Clay,” said Holmes. “have been at some small expense over this
matter, which shall expect  bank refund, but beyond that am
amply repaid by having had an experience which in many ways unique,
 by hearing  very remarkable narrative of  Red-headed League.”

“You see, Watson,” he explained in  early hours of  morning as we
sat over a glass of whisky  soda in Baker Street, “it was perfectly
obvious from  first that  only possible object of thrar
fantastic business of  advertisement of  League,   copying
of  _Encyclopædia_, must be get thnot over-bright pawnbroker
out of  way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way of
managing it, but, really, it would be difficult suggest a better.
 method was no doubt suggested Clay’s ingenious mind by 
colour of haccomplice’s hair.  £ 4 a week was a lure which must
draw him,  what was it m, who were playing for thouss? y
put in  advertisement, one rogue has  temporary office,  or
rogue incites  man apply for it,  toger y manage to
secure habsence every morning in  week. From  time that I
heard of  assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious me
that he had some strong motive for securing  situation.”

“But how could you guess what  motive was?”

“Had re been women in  house, should have suspected a mere
vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of  question.  man’s
business was a small one,  re was nothing in hhouse which
could account for such elaborate preparations,  such an expenditure
as y were at. It must, n, be something out of  house. What
could it be? thought of  assistant’s fondness for photography, 
htrick of vanishing in cellar.  cellar! re was  end
of thtangled clue. n made inquiries as thmysterious
assistant  found that had deal with one of  coolest  most
daring criminals in London. He was doing something in 
cellar—something which took many hours a day for months on end. What
could it be, once more? could think of nothing save that he was
running a tunnel some or building.

“So far had got when we went visit  scene of action. I
surprised you by beating upon  pavement with my stick. was
ascertaining wher  cellar stretched out in front or behind. It
was not in front. n rang  bell, , as hoped,  assistant
answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes
upon each or before. hardly looked at hface. Hknees were
what wished see. You must yourself have remarked how worn,
wrinkled,  stained y were. y spoke of those hours of
burrowing.  only remaining point was what y were burrowing for. I
walked round  corner, saw  City  Suburban Bank abutted on our
friend’s premises,  felt that had solved my problem. When you
drove home after  concert called upon Scotl Yard  upon 
chairman of  bank directors, with  result that you have seen.”

“ how could you tell that y would make ir attempt to-night?” I
asked.

“Well, when y closed ir League offices that was a sign that y
cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s presence—in or words, that
y had completed ir tunnel. But it was essential that y should
use it soon, as it might be discovered, or  bullion might be
removed. Saturday would suit m better than any or day, as it
would give m two days for ir escape. For all se reasons I
expected m come to-night.”

“You reasoned it out beautifully,” exclaimed in unfeigned admiration.
“It so long a chain,  yet every link rings true.”

“It saved me from ennui,” he answered, yawning. “Alas! already feel
it closing in upon me. My life spent in one long effort escape
from  commonplaces of existence. se little problems help me do
so.”

“ you are a benefactor of  race,” said I.

He shrugged hshoulders. “Well, perhaps, after all, it of some
little use,” he remarked. “‘_L’homme c’est rien—l’œuvre c’est tout_,’
as Gustave Flaubert wrote George S.”



III. A CASE OF IDENTITY

“My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on eir side of 
fire in hlodgings at Baker Street, “life infinitely stranger than
anything which  mind of man could invent. We would not dare to
conceive  things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. If
we could fly out of that window h in h, hover over thgreat
city, gently remove  roofs,  peep in at  queer things which
are going on,  strange coincidences,  plannings, 
cross-purposes,  wonderful chains of events, working through
generations,  leading  most _outré_ results, it would make all
fiction with its conventionalities  foreseen conclusions most stale
 unprofitable.”

“ yet am not convinced of it,” answered. “ cases which come
light in  papers are, as a rule, bald enough,  vulgar enough.
We have in our police reports realism pushed its extreme limits, 
yet  result is, it must be confessed, neir fascinating nor
artistic.”

“A certain selection  discretion must be used in producing a
realistic effect,” remarked Holmes. “Thwanting in  police
report, where more stress laid, perhaps, upon  platitudes of 
magistrate than upon  details, which an observer contain 
vital essence of  whole matter. Depend upon it, re nothing so
unnatural as  commonplace.”

smiled  shook my head. “can quite underst your thinking so,”
said. “Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser  helper
everybody who absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents,
you are brought in contact with all that strange  bizarre. But
here”—picked up  morning paper from  ground—“let us put it a
practical test. Here  first heading upon which come. ‘A
husb’s cruelty hwife.’ re half a column of print, but I
know without reading it that it all perfectly familiar me. re
is, of course,  or woman,  drink,  push,  blow, 
bruise,  sympatic sister or llady.  crudest of writers
could invent nothing more crude.”

“Indeed, your example an unfortunate one for your argument,” said
Holmes, taking  paper  glancing heye down it. “Th
Dundas separation case, , as it happens, was engaged in clearing
up some small points in connection with it.  husb was a
teetotaler, re was no or woman,   conduct complained of was
that he had drifted in habit of winding up every meal by taking
out hfalse teeth  hurling m at hwife, which, you will
allow, not an action likely occur  imagination of 
average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor,  acknowledge
that have scored over you in your example.”

He held out hsnuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in 
centre of  lid. Its splendour was in such contrast hhomely
ways  simple life that could not help commenting upon it.

“Ah,” said he, “forgot that had not seen you for some weeks. It is
a little souvenir from  King of Bohemia in return for my assistance
in  case of  Irene Adler papers.”

“  ring?” asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which
sparkled upon hfinger.

“It was from  reigning family of Holl, though  matter in which
served m was of such delicacy that cannot confide it even to
you, who have been good enough chronicle one or two of my little
problems.”

“ have you any on h just now?” asked with interest.

“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.
y are important, you underst, without being interesting. Indeed,
have found that it usually in unimportant matters that re a
field for  observation,  for  quick analysof cause 
effect which gives  charm an investigation.  larger crimes are
apt be  simpler, for  bigger  crime  more obvious, as a
rule,  motive. In se cases, save for one rar intricate
matter which has been referred me from Marseilles, re nothing
which presents any features of interest. It possible, however, that
may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this
one of my clients, or am much mistaken.”

He had risen from hchair  was sting between  parted blinds
gazing down in dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over
hshoulder, saw that on  pavement opposite re stood a large
woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck,  a large curling red
fear in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish Duchess
of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under thgreat panoply she
peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her
body oscillated backward  forward,  her fingers fidgeted with her
glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of  swimmer who leaves
 bank, she hurried across  road,  we heard  sharp clang of
 bell.

“have seen those symptoms before,” said Holmes, throwing his
cigarette in fire. “Oscillation upon  pavement always means an
_affaire de cœur_. She would like advice, but not sure that 
matter not too delicate for communication.  yet even here we may
discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no
longer oscillates,   usual symptom a broken bell wire. Here we
may take it that re a love matter, but that  maiden not so
much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to
resolve our doubts.”

As he spoke re was a tap at  door,   boy in buttons entered
announce Miss Mary Surl, while  lady herself loomed behind
hsmall black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny
pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with  easy courtesy for
which he was remarkable, , having closed  door  bowed her into
an armchair, he looked her over in  minute  yet abstracted
fashion which was peculiar him.

“Do you not find,” he said, “that with your short sight it a little
trying do so much typewriting?”

“did at first,” she answered, “but now know where  letters are
without looking.” n, suddenly realising  full purport of his
words, she gave a violent start  looked up, with fear 
astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. “You’ve heard about
me, Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how could you know all that?”

“Never mind,” said Holmes, laughing; “it my business know things.
Perhaps have trained myself see what ors overlook. If not, why
should you come consult me?”

“came you, sir, because heard of you from Mrs. Erege, whose
husb you found so easy when  police  everyone had given him up
for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, wish you would do as much for me. I’m not
rich, but still have a hundred a year in my own right, besides 
little that make by  machine,  would give it all know what
has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.”

“Why did you come away consult me in such a hurry?” asked Sherlock
Holmes, with hfinger-tips toger  heyes  ceiling.

Again a startled look came over  somewhat vacuous face of Miss Mary
Surl. “Yes, did bang out of  house,” she said, “for it made
me angry see  easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, my
far—took it all. He would not go  police,  he would not go
you,  so at last, as he would do nothing  kept on saying that
re was no harm done, it made me mad,  just on with my things
 came right away you.”

“Your far,” said Holmes, “your stepfar, surely, since  name is
different.”

“Yes, my stepfar. call him far, though it sounds funny, too,
for he only five years  two months older than myself.”

“ your mor alive?”

“Oh, yes, mor alive  well. wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes,
when she married again so soon after far’s death,  a man who was
nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Far was a plumber in 
Tottenham Court Road,  he left a tidy business behind him, which
mor carried on with Mr. Hardy,  foreman; but when Mr. Windibank
came he made her sell  business, for he was very superior, being a
traveller in wines. y got £ 4700 for  goodwill  interest,
which wasn’t near as much as far could have got if he had been
alive.”

had expected see Sherlock Holmes impatient under thrambling 
inconsequential narrative, but, on  contrary, he had listened with
 greatest concentration of attention.

“Your own little income,” he asked, “does it come out of  business?”

“Oh, no, sir. It quite separate  was left me by my uncle Ned in
Auckl. It in New Zeal stock, paying 4½ per cent. Two thous
five hundred pounds was  amount, but can only touch  interest.”

“You interest me extremely,” said Holmes. “ since you draw so large
a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn in bargain, you no
doubt travel a little  indulge yourself in every way. believe that
a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about £ 60.”

“could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you underst
that as long as live at home don’t wish be a burden m, 
so y have  use of  money just while am staying with m. Of
course, that only just for  time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest
every quarter  pays it over mor,  find that can do
pretty well with what earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a
sheet,  can often do from fifteen twenty sheets in a day.”

“You have made your position very clear me,” said Holmes. “This
my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before
myself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. Hosmer
Angel.”

A flush stole over Miss Surl’s face,  she picked nervously at
 fringe of her jacket. “met him first at  gasfitters’ ball,”
she said. “y used send far tickets when he was alive,  n
afterwards y remembered us,  sent m mor. Mr. Windibank
did not wish us go. He never did wish us go anywhere. He would
get quite mad if wanted so much as join a Sunday-school treat. But
thtime was set on going,  would go; for what right had he to
prevent? He said  folk were not fit for us know, when all
far’s friends were be re.  he said that had nothing fit
wear, when had my purple plush that had never so much as taken
out of  drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to
France upon  business of  firm, but we went, mor  I, with
Mr. Hardy, who used be our foreman,  it was re met Mr.
Hosmer Angel.”

“suppose,” said Holmes, “that when Mr. Windibank came back from
France he was very annoyed at your having gone  ball.”

“Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, remember, 
shrugged hshoulders,  said re was no use denying anything a
woman, for she would have her way.”

“see. n at  gasfitters’ ball you met, as underst, a
gentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel.”

“Yes, sir. met him that night,  he called next day ask if we
had got home all safe,  after that we met him—that say, Mr.
Holmes, met him twice for walks, but after that far came back
again,  Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come  house any more.”

“No?”

“Well, you know far didn’t like anything of  sort. He wouldn’t
have any visitors if he could help it,  he used say that a woman
should be happy in her own family circle. But n, as used say to
mor, a woman wants her own circle begin with,  had not got
mine yet.”

“But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt see you?”

“Well, far was going off France again in a week,  Hosmer wrote
 said that it would be safer  better not see each or until
he had gone. We could write in  meantime,  he used write every
day. took  letters in in  morning, so re was no need for
far know.”

“Were you engaged  gentleman at thtime?”

“Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after  first walk that we
took. Hosmer—Mr. Angel—was a cashier in an office in Leadenhall
Street——”

“What office?”

“That’s  worst of it, Mr. Holmes, don’t know.”

“Where did he live, n?”

“He slept on  premises.”

“ you don’t know haddress?”

“No—except that it was Leadenhall Street.”

“Where did you address your letters, n?”

“ Leadenhall Street Post Office, be left till called for. He
said that if y were sent  office he would be chaffed by all
 or clerks about having letters from a lady, so offered to
typewrite m, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for he said
that when wrote m y seemed come from me, but when y were
typewritten he always felt that  machine had come between us. That
will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes,   little
things that he would think of.”

“It was most suggestive,” said Holmes. “It has long been an axiom of
mine that  little things are infinitely  most important. Can you
remember any or little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?”

“He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rar walk with me in 
evening than in  daylight, for he said that he hated be
conspicuous. Very retiring  gentlemanly he was. Even hvoice was
gentle. He’d had  quinsy  swollen gls when he was young, he
told me,  it had left him with a weak throat,  a hesitating,
whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat 
plain, but heyes were weak, just as mine are,  he wore tinted
glasses against  glare.”

“Well,  what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfar, returned
France?”

“Mr. Hosmer Angel came  house again  proposed that we should
marry before far came back. He was in dreadful earnest  made me
swear, with my hs on  Testament, that whatever happened would
always be true him. Mor said he was quite right make me swear,
 that it was a sign of hpassion. Mor was all in hfavour
from  first  was even fonder of him than was. n, when y
talked of marrying within  week, began ask about far; but
y both said never mind about far, but just tell him
afterwards,  mor said she would make it all right with him. I
didn’t quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that should ask
hleave, as he was only a few years older than me; but didn’t want
do anything on  sly, so wrote far at Bordeaux, where 
company has its French offices, but  letter came back me on 
very morning of  wedding.”

“It missed him, n?”

“Yes, sir; for he had started Engl just before it arrived.”

“Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, n, for 
Friday. Was it be in church?”

“Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was be at St. Saviour’s, near King’s
Cross,  we were have breakfast afterwards at  St. Pancras
Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as re were two of us he
put us both init  stepped himself ina four-wheeler, which
happened be  only or cab in  street. We got  church
first,  when  four-wheeler drove up we waited for him step
out, but he never did,  when  cabman got down from  box 
looked re was no one re!  cabman said that he could not
imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with hown
eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes,  have never seen or heard
anything since n throw any light upon what became of him.”

“It seems me that you have been very shamefully treated,” said
Holmes.

“Oh, no, sir! He was too good  kind leave me so. Why, all 
morning he was saying me that, whatever happened, was be true;
 that even if something quite unforeseen occurred separate us, I
was always remember that was pledged him,  that he would
claim hpledge sooner or later. It seemed strange talk for a
wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning it.”

“Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, n, that some
unforeseen catastrophe has occurred him?”

“Yes, sir. believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would not
have talked so.  n think that what he foresaw happened.”

“But you have no notion as what it could have been?”

“None.”

“One more question. How did your mor take  matter?”

“She was angry,  said that was never speak of  matter
again.”

“ your far? Did you tell him?”

“Yes;  he seemed think, with me, that something had happened, 
that should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest could
anyone have in bringing me  doors of  church,  n leaving
me? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me  got
my money settled on him, re might be some reason, but Hosmer was
very independent about money  never would look at a shilling of
mine.  yet, what could have happened?  why could he not write?
Oh, it drives me half-mad think of it,  can’t sleep a wink at
night.” She pulled a little hkerchief out of her muff  began to
sob heavily init.

“shall glance in case for you,” said Holmes, rising, “ I
have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let  weight
of  matter rest upon me now,  do not let your mind dwell upon it
furr. Above all, try let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from your
memory, as he has done from your life.”

“n you don’t think I’ll see him again?”

“fear not.”

“n what has happened him?”

“You will leave that question in my hs. should like an accurate
description of him  any letters of hwhich you can spare.”

“advertised for him in last Saturday’s _Chronicle_,” said she. “Here
 slip  here are four letters from him.”

“Thank you.  your address?”

“No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.”

“Mr. Angel’s address you never had, underst. Where your
far’s place of business?”

“He travels for Westhouse & Marbank,  great claret importers of
Fenchurch Street.”

“Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leave
 papers here,  remember  advice which have given you. Let
 whole incident be a sealed book,  do not allow it affect your
life.”

“You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but cannot do that. shall be true
Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.”

For all  preposterous hat   vacuous face, re was something
noble in  simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect.
She laid her little bundle of papers upon  table  went her way,
with a promise come again whenever she might be summoned.

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with hfingertips still
pressed toger, hlegs stretched out in front of him,  hgaze
directed upward  ceiling. n he took down from  rack  old
 oily clay pipe, which was him as a counsellor, , having lit
it, he leaned back in hchair, with  thick blue cloud-wreaths
spinning up from him,  a look of infinite languor in hface.

“Quite an interesting study, that maiden,” he observed. “found her
more interesting than her little problem, which, by  way, rar
a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, in
over in ’77,  re was something of  sort at  Hague last
year. Old as  idea, however, re were one or two details which
were new me. But  maiden herself was most instructive.”

“You appeared read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible to
me,” remarked.

“Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where look,
 so you missed all that was important. can never bring you to
realise  importance of sleeves,  suggestiveness of thumb-nails,
or  great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you
gar from that woman’s appearance? Describe it.”

“Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a
fear of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn
upon it,  a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was
brown, rar darker than coffee colour, with a little purple plush at
 neck  sleeves. Her gloves were greyish  were worn through at
 right forefinger. Her boots didn’t observe. She had small round,
hanging gold earrings,  a general air of being fairly well-to-do in
a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.”

Sherlock Holmes clapped hhs softly toger  chuckled.

“’Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have
really done very well indeed. It true that you have missed
everything of importance, but you have hit upon  method,  you
have a quick eye for colour. Never trust general impressions, my
boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance always
at a woman’s sleeve. In a man it perhaps better first take 
knee of  trouser. As you observe, thwoman had plush upon her
sleeves, which a most useful material for showing traces.  double
line a little above  wrist, where  typewritist presses against
 table, was beautifully defined.  sewing-machine, of  h
type, leaves a similar mark, but only on  left arm,  on  side
of it farst from  thumb, instead of being right across 
broadest part, as thwas. n glanced at her face, , observing
 dint of a pince-nez at eir side of her nose, ventured a remark
upon short sight  typewriting, which seemed surprise her.”

“It surprised me.”

“But, surely, it was obvious. was n much surprised  interested
on glancing down observe that, though  boots which she was
wearing were not unlike each or, y were really odd ones;  one
having a slightly decorated toe-cap,   or a plain one. One was
buttoned only in  two lower buttons out of five,   or at
 first, third,  fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady,
orwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots,
half-buttoned, it no great deduction say that she came away in a
hurry.”

“ what else?” asked, keenly interested, as always was, by my
friend’s incisive reasoning.

“noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home
but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove was
torn at  forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both glove
 finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry 
dipped her pen too deep. It must have been thmorning, or  mark
would not remain clear upon  finger. All thamusing, though
rar elementary, but must go back business, Watson. Would you
mind reading me  advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?”

held  little printed slip  light. “Missing,” it said, “on
 morning of  fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About
five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, black
hair, a little bald in  centre, bushy, black side-whiskers 
moustache; tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed,
when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat,
gold Albert chain,  grey Harrtweed trousers, with brown gaiters
over elastic-sided boots. Known have been employed in an office in
Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing,” &c, &c.

“That will do,” said Holmes. “As  letters,” he continued,
glancing over m, “y are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in
m Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. re one
remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.”

“y are typewritten,” remarked.

“Not only that, but  signature typewritten. Look at  neat
little ‘Hosmer Angel’ at  bottom. re a date, you see, but no
superscription except Leadenhall Street, which rar vague. 
point about  signature very suggestive—in fact, we may call it
conclusive.”

“Of what?”

“My dear fellow, it possible you do not see how strongly it bears
upon  case?”

“cannot say that do unless it were that he wished be able to
deny hsignature if an action for breach of promise were instituted.”

“No, that was not  point. However, shall write two letters, which
should settle  matter. One a firm in  City,  or to
 young lady’s stepfar, Mr. Windibank, asking him wher he could
meet us here at six o’clock to-morrow evening. It just as well that
we should do business with  male relatives.  now, Doctor, we can
do nothing until  answers those letters come, so we may put our
little problem upon  shelf for  interim.”

had had so many reasons believe in my friend’s subtle powers of
reasoning  extraordinary energy in action that felt that he must
have some solid grounds for  assured  easy demeanour with which
he treated  singular mystery which he had been called upon to
fathom. Once only had known him fail, in  case of  King of
Bohemia  of  Irene Adler photograph; but when looked back to
 weird business of  Sign of Four,   extraordinary
circumstances connected with  Study in Scarlet, felt that it would
be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.

left him n, still puffing at hblack clay pipe, with 
conviction that when came again on  next evening would find that
he held in hhs all  clues which would lead up  identity
of  disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Surl.

A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at
 time,   whole of next day was busy at  bedside of 
sufferer. It was not until close upon six o’clock that found myself
free  was able spring ina hansom  drive Baker Street,
half afraid that might be too late assist at  _dénouement_ of
 little mystery. found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half
asleep, with hlong, thin form curled up in  recesses of his
armchair. A formidable array of bottles  test-tubes, with 
pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent
hday in  chemical work which was so dear him.

“Well, have you solved it?” asked as entered.

“Yes. It was  bisulphate of baryta.”

“No, no,  mystery!” cried.

“Oh, that! thought of  salt that have been working upon. re
was never any mystery in  matter, though, as said yesterday, some
of  details are of interest.  only drawback that re no
law, fear, that can touch  scoundrel.”

“Who was he, n,  what was hobject in deserting Miss
Surl?”

 question was hardly out of my mouth,  Holmes had not yet opened
hlips reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in  passage  a
tap at  door.

“Th girl’s stepfar, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “He
has written me say that he would be here at six. Come in!”

 man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty
years of age, clean-shaven,  sallow-skinned, with a bl,
insinuating manner,  a pair of wonderfully sharp  penetrating
grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed hshiny
top-hat upon  sideboard,  with a slight bow sidled down in
nearest chair.

“Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “think that this
typewritten letter from you, in which you made an appointment with
me for six o’clock?”

“Yes, sir. am afraid that am a little late, but am not quite my
own master, you know. am sorry that Miss Surl has troubled you
about thlittle matter, for think it far better not wash
linen of  sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that she
came, but she a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have
noticed,  she not easily controlled when she has made up her mind
on a point. Of course, did not mind you so much, as you are not
connected with  official police, but it not pleasant have a
family misfortune like thnoised abroad. Besides, it a useless
expense, for how could you possibly find thHosmer Angel?”

“On  contrary,” said Holmes quietly; “have every reason believe
that will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel.”

Mr. Windibank gave a violent start  dropped hgloves. “am
delighted hear it,” he said.

“It a curious thing,” remarked Holmes, “that a typewriter has really
quite as much individuality as a man’s hwriting. Unless y are
quite new, no two of m write exactly alike. Some letters get more
worn than ors,  some wear only on one side. Now, you remark in
thnote of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case re some
little slurring over of  ‘e,’  a slight defect in  tail of 
‘r.’ re are fourteen or characteristics, but those are  more
obvious.”

“We do all our correspondence with thmachine at  office,  no
doubt it a little worn,” our visitor answered, glancing keenly at
Holmes with hbright little eyes.

“ now will show you what really a very interesting study, Mr.
Windibank,” Holmes continued. “think of writing anor little
monograph some of se days on  typewriter  its relation to
crime. It a subject which have devoted some little attention. I
have here four letters which purport come from  missing man. y
are all typewritten. In each case, not only are  ‘e’s’ slurred 
 ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you care use my
magnifying lens, that  fourteen or characteristics which I
have alluded are re as well.”

Mr. Windibank sprang out of hchair  picked up hhat. “cannot
waste time over thsort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,” he said. “If
you can catch  man, catch him,  let me know when you have done
it.”

“Certainly,” said Holmes, stepping over  turning  key in 
door. “let you know, n, that have caught him!”

“What! where?” shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white hlips 
glancing about him like a rat in a trap.

“Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,” said Holmes suavely. “re no
possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It quite too transparent,
 it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossible
for me solve so simple a question. That’s right! Sit down  let us
talk it over.”

Our visitor collapsed ina chair, with a ghastly face  a glitter
of moisture on hbrow. “It—it’s not actionable,” he stammered.

“am very much afraid that it not. But between ourselves,
Windibank, it was as cruel  selfish  heartless a trick in a petty
way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over  course of
events,  you will contradict me if go wrong.”

 man sat huddled up in hchair, with hhead sunk upon his
breast, like one who utterly crushed. Holmes stuck hfeet up on
 corner of  mantelpiece , leaning back with hhs in his
pockets, began talking, rar himself, as it seemed, than us.

“ man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,”
said he, “ he enjoyed  use of  money of  daughter as long
as she lived with m. It was a considerable sum, for people in ir
position,   loss of it would have made a serious difference. It
was worth an effort preserve it.  daughter was of a good, amiable
disposition, but affectionate  warm-hearted in her ways, so that it
was evident that with her fair personal advantages,  her little
income, she would not be allowed remain single long. Now her
marriage would mean, of course,  loss of a hundred a year, so what
does her stepfar do prevent it? He takes  obvious course of
keeping her at home  forbidding her seek  company of people of
her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She
became restive, insisted upon her rights,  finally announced her
positive intention of going a certain ball. What does her clever
stepfar do n? He conceives an idea more creditable hhead
than hheart. With  connivance  assistance of hwife he
disguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked
 face with a moustache  a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear
voice inan insinuating whisper,  doubly secure on account of 
girl’s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel,  keeps off or
lovers by making love himself.”

“It was only a joke at first,” groaned our visitor. “We never thought
that she would have been so carried away.”

“Very likely not. However that may be,  young lady was very
decidedly carried away, , having quite made up her mind that her
stepfar was in France,  suspicion of treachery never for an
instant entered her mind. She was flattered by  gentleman’s
attentions,   effect was increased by  loudly expressed
admiration of her mor. n Mr. Angel began call, for it was
obvious that  matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a
real effect were be produced. re were meetings,  an
engagement, which would finally secure  girl’s affections from
turning towards anyone else. But  deception could not be kept up
forever. se pretended journeys France were rar cumbrous. 
thing do was clearly bring  business an end in such a
dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon 
young lady’s mind  prevent her from looking upon any or suitor
for some time come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a
Testament,  hence also  allusions a possibility of something
happening on  very morning of  wedding. James Windibank wished
Miss Surl be so bound Hosmer Angel,  so uncertain as to
hfate, that for ten years come, at any rate, she would not listen
anor man. As far as  church door he brought her,  n, as
he could go no farr, he conveniently vanished away by  old trick
of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler  out at  or. I
think that was  chain of events, Mr. Windibank!”

Our visitor had recovered something of hassurance while Holmes had
been talking,  he rose from hchair now with a cold sneer upon his
pale face.

“It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “but if you are so
very sharp you ought be sharp enough know that it you who are
breaking  law now,  not me. have done nothing actionable from
 first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself
open an action for assault  illegal constraint.”

“ law cannot, as you say, touch you,” said Holmes, unlocking 
throwing open  door, “yet re never was a man who deserved
punishment more. If  young lady has a bror or a friend, he ought
lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!” he continued, flushing
up at  sight of  bitter sneer upon  man’s face, “it not
part of my duties my client, but here’s a hunting crop hy,  I
think shall just treat myself to—” He took two swift steps 
whip, but before he could grasp it re was a wild clatter of steps
upon  stairs,  heavy hall door banged,  from  window we
could see Mr. James Windibank running at  top of hspeed down 
road.

“re’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!” said Holmes, laughing, as he threw
himself down inhchair once more. “That fellow will rise from
crime crime until he does something very bad,  ends on a gallows.
 case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.”

“cannot now entirely see all  steps of your reasoning,” I
remarked.

“Well, of course it was obvious from  first that thMr. Hosmer
Angel must have some strong object for hcurious conduct,  it was
equally clear that  only man who really profited by  incident, as
far as we could see, was  stepfar. n  fact that  two men
were never toger, but that  one always appeared when  or
was away, was suggestive. So were  tinted spectacles   curious
voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did  bushy whiskers. My
suspicions were all confirmed by hpeculiar action in typewriting his
signature, which, of course, inferred that hhwriting was so
familiar her that she would recognise even  smallest sample of
it. You see all se isolated facts, toger with many minor ones,
all pointed in  same direction.”

“ how did you verify m?”

“Having once spotted my man, it was easy get corroboration. knew
 firm for which thman worked. Having taken  printed
description. eliminated everything from it which could be  result
of a disguise— whiskers,  glasses,  voice,  sent it to
 firm, with a request that y would inform me wher it answered
 description of any of ir travellers. had already noticed
 peculiarities of  typewriter,  wrote  man himself at
hbusiness address asking him if he would come here. As expected,
hreply was typewritten  revealed  same trivial but
characteristic defects.  same post brought me a letter from
Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, say that  description
tallied in every respect with that of ir employé, James Windibank.
_Voilà tout_!”

“ Miss Surl?”

“If tell her she will not believe me. You may remember  old
Persian saying, ‘re danger for him who taketh  tiger cub, 
danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ re as
much sense in Hafiz as in Horace,  as much knowledge of  world.”



 IV.  BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY

We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife  I, when  maid
brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes  ran in thway:

“Have you a couple of days spare? Have just been wired for from 
west of Engl in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall be
glad if you will come with me. Air  scenery perfect. Leave
Paddington by  11:15.”

“What do you say, dear?” said my wife, looking across at me. “Will you
go?”

“really don’t know what say. have a fairly long list at
present.”

“Oh, Anstrur would do your work for you. You have been looking a
little pale lately. think that  change would do you good,  you
are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes’ cases.”

“should be ungrateful if were not, seeing what gained through one
of m,” answered. “But if am go, must pack at once, for I
have only half an hour.”

My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had  effect
of making me a prompt  ready traveller. My wants were few 
simple, so that in less than  time stated was in a cab with my
valise, rattling away Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacing
up  down  platform, htall, gaunt figure made even gaunter 
taller by hlong grey travelling-cloak  close-fitting cloth cap.

“It really very good of you come, Watson,” said he. “It makes a
considerable difference me, having someone with me on whom can
thoroughly rely. Local aid always eir worthless or else biassed.
If you will keep  two corner seats shall get  tickets.”

We had  carriage ourselves save for an immense litter of papers
which Holmes had brought with him. Among se he rummaged  read,
with intervals of note-taking  of meditation, until we were past
Reading. n he suddenly rolled m all ina gigantic ball 
tossed m up on rack.

“Have you heard anything of  case?” he asked.

“Not a word. have not seen a paper for some days.”

“ London press has not had very full accounts. have just been
looking through all  recent papers in order master 
particulars. It seems, from what gar, be one of those simple
cases which are so extremely difficult.”

“That sounds a little paradoxical.”

“But it profoundly true. Singularity almost invariably a clue.
 more featureless  commonplace a crime is,  more difficult it
bring it home. In thcase, however, y have established a
very serious case against  son of  murdered man.”

“It a murder, n?”

“Well, it conjectured be so. shall take nothing for granted
until have  opportunity of looking personally init. will
explain  state of things you, as far as have been able to
underst it, in a very few words.

“Boscombe Valley a country district not very far from Ross, in
Herefordshire.  largest led proprietor in that part a Mr. John
Turner, who made hmoney in Australia  returned some years ago to
 old country. One of  farms which he held, that of Harley, was
let Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an ex-Australian.  men had
known each or in  colonies, so that it was not unnatural that
when y came settle down y should do so as near each or as
possible. Turner was apparently  richer man, so McCarthy became his
tenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfect equality, as
y were frequently toger. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eighteen,
 Turner had an only daughter of  same age, but neir of m
had wives living. y appear have avoided  society of 
neighbouring English families  have led retired lives, though
both  McCarthys were fond of sport  were frequently seen at 
race-meetings of  neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servants—a man
 a girl. Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at 
least. That as much as have been able gar about 
families. Now for  facts.

“On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left hhouse at
Harley about three in  afternoon  walked down  Boscombe
Pool, which a small lake formed by  spreading out of  stream
which runs down  Boscombe Valley. He had been out with his
serving-man in  morning at Ross,  he had told  man that he
must hurry, as he had an appointment of importance keep at three.
From that appointment he never came back alive.

“From Harley Farmhouse  Boscombe Pool a quarter of a mile,
 two people saw him as he passed over thground. One was an old
woman, whose name not mentioned,   or was William Crowder,
a game-keeper in  employ of Mr. Turner. Both se witnesses depose
that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone.  game-keeper adds that within a
few minutes of hseeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen hson, Mr.
James McCarthy, going  same way with a gun under harm. 
best of hbelief,  far was actually in sight at  time, 
 son was following him. He thought no more of  matter until he
heard in  evening of  tragedy that had occurred.

“ two McCarthys were seen after  time when William Crowder, 
game-keeper, lost sight of m.  Boscombe Pool thickly wooded
round, with just a fringe of grass  of reeds round  edge. A girl
of fourteen, Patience Moran, who  daughter of  lodge-keeper of
 Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of  woods picking flowers.
She states that while she was re she saw, at  border of  wood
 close by  lake, Mr. McCarthy  hson,  that y appeared
be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy  elder using
very strong language hson,  she saw  latter raise up his
h as if strike hfar. She was so frightened by ir
violence that she ran away  told her mor when she reached home
that she had left  two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, 
that she was afraid that y were going fight. She had hardly said
 words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up  lodge say
that he had found hfar dead in  wood,  ask for  help
of  lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without eir hgun or his
hat,  hright h  sleeve were observed be stained with
fresh blood. On following him y found  dead body stretched out
upon  grass beside  pool.  head had been beaten in by repeated
blows of some heavy  blunt weapon.  injuries were such as might
very well have been inflicted by  butt-end of hson’s gun, which
was found lying on  grass within a few paces of  body. Under
se circumstances  young man was instantly arrested,  a verdict
of ‘wilful murder’ having been returned at  inquest on Tuesday, he
was on Wednesday brought before  magistrates at Ross, who have
referred  case  next Assizes. Those are  main facts of 
case as y came out before  coroner   police-court.”

“could hardly imagine a more damning case,” remarked. “If ever
circumstantial evidence pointed a criminal it does so here.”

“Circumstantial evidence a very tricky thing,” answered Holmes
thoughtfully. “It may seem point very straight one thing, but if
you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing in
an equally uncompromising manner something entirely different. It
must be confessed, however, that  case looks exceedingly grave
against  young man,  it very possible that he indeed 
culprit. re are several people in  neighbourhood, however, 
among m Miss Turner,  daughter of  neighbouring lowner, who
believe in hinnocence,  who have retained Lestrade, whom you may
recollect in connection with  Study in Scarlet, work out  case
in hinterest. Lestrade, being rar puzzled, has referred  case
me,  hence it that two middle-aged gentlemen are flying
westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting ir
breakfasts at home.”

“am afraid,” said I, “that  facts are so obvious that you will
find little credit be gained out of thcase.”

“re nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact,” he answered,
laughing. “Besides, we may chance hit upon some or obvious facts
which may have been by no means obvious Mr. Lestrade. You know me
too well think that am boasting when say that shall eir
confirm or destroy hory by means which he quite incapable of
employing, or even of understing. take  first example h,
very clearly perceive that in your bedroom  window upon 
right-h side,  yet question wher Mr. Lestrade would have
noted even so self-evident a thing as that.”

“How on earth—”

“My dear fellow, know you well. know  military neatness which
characterises you. You shave every morning,  in thseason you
shave by  sunlight; but since your shaving less  less complete
as we get farr back on  left side, until it becomes positively
slovenly as we get round  angle of  jaw, it surely very clear
that that side less illuminated than  or. could not imagine
a man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light  being
satisfied with such a result. only quote thas a trivial example of
observation  inference. rein lies my _métier_,  it just
possible that it may be of some service in  investigation which lies
before us. re are one or two minor points which were brought out in
 inquest,  which are worth considering.”

“What are y?”

“It appears that harrest did not take place at once, but after 
return Harley Farm. On  inspector of constabulary informing
him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised to
hear it,  that it was no more than hdeserts. Thobservation of
hhad  natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which might
have remained in  minds of  coroner’s jury.”

“It was a confession,” ejaculated.

“No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence.”

“Coming on  top of such a damning series of events, it was at least
a most suspicious remark.”

“On  contrary,” said Holmes, “it  brightest rift which can
at present see in  clouds. However innocent he might be, he could
not be such an absolute imbecile as not see that  circumstances
were very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at hown
arrest, or feigned indignation at it, should have looked upon it as
highly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be natural
under  circumstances,  yet might appear be  best policy to
a scheming man. Hfrank acceptance of  situation marks him as
eir an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint
 firmness. As hremark about hdeserts, it was also not
unnatural if you consider that he stood beside  dead body of his
far,  that re no doubt that he had that very day so far
forgotten hfilial duty as by words with him,  even,
according  little girl whose evidence so important, raise
hh as if strike him.  self-reproach  contrition which
are displayed in hremark appear me be  signs of a healthy
mind rar than of a guilty one.”

shook my head. “Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence,”
remarked.

“So y have.  many men have been wrongfully hanged.”

“What  young man’s own account of  matter?”

“It is, am afraid, not very encouraging hsupporters, though
re are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will find
it here,  may read it for yourself.”

He picked out from hbundle a copy of  local Herefordshire paper,
 having turned down  sheet he pointed out  paragraph in which
 unfortunate young man had given hown statement of what had
occurred. settled myself down in  corner of  carriage  read
it very carefully. It ran in thway:

“Mr. James McCarthy,  only son of  deceased, was n called 
gave evidence as follows: ‘had been away from home for three days at
Bristol,  had only just returned upon  morning of last Monday,
 3rd. My far was absent from home at  time of my arrival, 
was informed by  maid that he had driven over Ross with John
Cobb,  groom. Shortly after my return heard  wheels of htrap
in  yard, , looking out of my window, saw him get out  walk
rapidly out of  yard, though was not aware in which direction he
was going. n took my gun  strolled out in  direction of 
Boscombe Pool, with  intention of visiting  rabbit warren which
upon  or side. On my way saw William Crowder, 
game-keeper, as he had stated in hevidence; but he mistaken in
thinking that was following my far. had no idea that he was in
front of me. When about a hundred yards from  pool heard a cry of
“Cooee!” which was a usual signal between my far  myself. n
hurried forward,  found him sting by  pool. He appeared be
much surprised at seeing me  asked me rar roughly what was
doing re. A conversation ensued which led high words  almost
blows, for my far was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that
hpassion was becoming ungovernable, left him  returned towards
Harley Farm. had not gone more than 150 yards, however, when I
heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me run back again. I
found my far expiring upon  ground, with hhead terribly
injured. dropped my gun  held him in my arms, but he almost
instantly expired. knelt beside him for some minutes,  n made
my way Mr. Turner’s lodge-keeper, hhouse being  nearest, to
ask for assistance. saw no one near my far when returned,  I
have no idea how he came by hinjuries. He was not a popular man,
being somewhat cold  forbidding in hmanners, but he had, as far
as know, no active enemies. know nothing furr of  matter.’

“ Coroner: Did your far make any statement you before he died?

“Witness: He mumbled a few words, but could only catch some allusion
a rat.

“ Coroner: What did you underst by that?

“Witness: It conveyed no meaning me. thought that he was
delirious.

“ Coroner: What was  point upon which you  your far had
thfinal quarrel?

“Witness: should prefer not answer.

“ Coroner: am afraid that must press it.

“Witness: It really impossible for me tell you. can assure you
that it has nothing do with  sad tragedy which followed.

“ Coroner: That for  court decide. need not point out to
you that your refusal answer will prejudice your case considerably
in any future proceedings which may arise.

“Witness: must still refuse.

“ Coroner: underst that  cry of ‘Cooee’ was a common signal
between you  your far?

“Witness: It was.

“ Coroner: How was it, n, that he uttered it before he saw you,
 before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?

“Witness (with considerable confusion): do not know.

“A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions when you
returned on hearing  cry  found your far fatally injured?

“Witness: Nothing definite.

“ Coroner: What do you mean?

“Witness: was so disturbed  excited as rushed out in open,
that could think of nothing except of my far. Yet have a vague
impression that as ran forward something lay upon  ground 
left of me. It seemed me be something grey in colour, a coat of
some sort, or a plaid perhaps. When rose from my far looked
round for it, but it was gone.

“‘Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?’

“‘Yes, it was gone.’

“  ‘You cannot say what it was?’

“‘No, had a feeling something was re.’

“‘How far from  body?’

“‘A dozen yards or so.’

“‘ how far from  edge of  wood?’

“‘About  same.’

“‘n if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards of
it?’

“‘Yes, but with my back towards it.’

“Thconcluded  examination of  witness.”

“see,” said as glanced down  column, “that  coroner in his
concluding remarks was rar severe upon young McCarthy. He calls
attention,  with reason,  discrepancy about hfar having
signalled him before seeing him, also hrefusal give details
of hconversation with hfar,  hsingular account of his
far’s dying words. y are all, as he remarks, very much against
 son.”

Holmes laughed softly himself  stretched himself out upon 
cushioned seat. “Both you   coroner have been at some pains,”
said he, “single out  very strongest points in  young man’s
favour. Don’t you see that you alternately give him credit for having
too much imagination  too little? Too little, if he could not invent
a cause of quarrel which would give him  sympathy of  jury; too
much, if he evolved from hown inner consciousness anything so
_outré_ as a dying reference a rat,   incident of 
vanishing cloth. No, sir, shall approach thcase from  point of
view that what thyoung man says true,  we shall see whir
that hyposwill lead us.  now here my pocket Petrarch, 
not anor word shall say of thcase until we are on  scene of
action. We lunch at Swindon,  see that we shall be re in twenty
minutes.”

It was nearly four o’clock when we at last, after passing through 
beautiful Stroud Valley,  over  broad gleaming Severn, found
ourselves at  pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean,
ferret-like man, furtive  sly-looking, was waiting for us upon 
platform. In spite of  light brown dustcoat  lear-leggings
which he wore in deference hrustic surroundings, had no
difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotl Yard. With him we drove
 Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged for us.

“have ordered a carriage,” said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea.
“knew your energetic nature,  that you would not be happy until
you had been on  scene of  crime.”

“It was very nice  complimentary of you,” Holmes answered. “It is
entirely a question of barometric pressure.”

Lestrade looked startled. “do not quite follow,” he said.

“How  glass? Twenty-nine, see. No wind,  not a cloud in 
sky. have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking,  
sofa very much superior  usual country hotel abomination. do
not think that it probable that shall use  carriage to-night.”

Lestrade laughed indulgently. “You have, no doubt, already formed your
conclusions from  newspapers,” he said. “ case as plain as a
pikestaff,   more one goes init  plainer it becomes. Still,
of course, one can’t refuse a lady,  such a very positive one, too.
She has heard of you,  would have your opinion, though repeatedly
told her that re was nothing which you could do which had not
already done. Why, bless my soul! here her carriage at  door.”

He had hardly spoken before re rushed in room one of  most
lovely young women that have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyes
shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of
her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement  concern.

“Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” she cried, glancing from one  or of
us,  finally, with a woman’s quick intuition, fastening upon my
companion, “am so glad that you have come. have driven down tell
you so. know that James didn’t do it. know it,  want you to
start upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt upon
that point. We have known each or since we were little children, 
know hfaults as no one else does; but he too tender-hearted to
hurt a fly. Such a charge absurd anyone who really knows him.”

“hope we may clear him, Miss Turner,” said Sherlock Holmes. “You may
rely upon my doing all that can.”

“But you have read  evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do
you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that he
innocent?”

“think that it very probable.”

“re, now!” she cried, throwing back her head  looking defiantly
at Lestrade. “You hear! He gives me hopes.”

Lestrade shrugged hshoulders. “am afraid that my colleague has
been a little quick in forming hconclusions,” he said.

“But he right. Oh! know that he right. James never did it. 
about hquarrel with hfar, am sure that  reason why he
would not speak about it  coroner was because was concerned in
it.”

“In what way?” asked Holmes.

“It no time for me hide anything. James  hfar had many
disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that re should
be a marriage between us. James  have always loved each or as
bror  sister; but of course he young  has seen very little
of life yet, ——well, he naturally did not wish do anything
like that yet. So re were quarrels,  this, am sure, was one of
m.”

“ your far?” asked Holmes. “Was he in favour of such a union?”

“No, he was averse it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour of
it.” A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one
of hkeen, questioning glances at her.

“Thank you for thinformation,” said he. “May see your far if I
call to-morrow?”

“am afraid  doctor won’t allow it.”

“ doctor?”

“Yes, have you not heard? Poor far has never been strong for years
back, but thhas broken him down completely. He has taken hbed,
 Dr. Willows says that he a wreck  that hnervous system is
shattered. Mr. McCarthy was  only man alive who had known dad in 
old days in Victoria.”

“Ha! In Victoria! That important.”

“Yes, at  mines.”

“Quite so; at  gold-mines, where, as underst, Mr. Turner made
hmoney.”

“Yes, certainly.”

“Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance me.”

“You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will go
 prison see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that
know him be innocent.”

“will, Miss Turner.”

“must go home now, for dad very ill,  he misses me so if I
leave him. Good-bye,  God help you in your undertaking.” She hurried
from  room as impulsively as she had entered,  we heard 
wheels of her carriage rattle off down  street.

“am ashamed of you, Holmes,” said Lestrade with dignity after a few
minutes’ silence. “Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to
disappoint? am not over-tender of heart, but call it cruel.”

“think that see my way clearing James McCarthy,” said Holmes.
“Have you an order see him in prison?”

“Yes, but only for you  me.”

“n shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have still
time take a train Hereford  see him to-night?”

“Ample.”

“n let us do so. Watson, fear that you will find it very slow, but
shall only be away a couple of hours.”

walked down  station with m,  n wered through 
streets of  little town, finally returning  hotel, where lay
upon  sofa  tried interest myself in a yellow-backed novel.
 puny plot of  story was so thin, however, when compared 
deep mystery through which we were groping,  found my attention
wer so continually from  action  fact, that at last flung
it across  room  gave myself up entirely a consideration of
 events of  day. Supposing that thunhappy young man’s story
were absolutely true, n what hellish thing, what absolutely
unforeseen  extraordinary calamity could have occurred between 
time when he parted from hfar,   moment when, drawn back by
hscreams, he rushed in glade? It was something terrible 
deadly. What could it be? Might not  nature of  injuries reveal
something my medical instincts? rang  bell  called for 
weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of  inquest.
In  surgeon’s deposition it was stated that  posterior third of
 left parietal bone   left half of  occipital bone had been
shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. marked  spot upon
my own head. Clearly such a blow must have been struck from behind.
That was some extent in favour of  accused, as when seen
quarrelling he was face face with hfar. Still, it did not go
for very much, for  older man might have turned hback before 
blow fell. Still, it might be worth while call Holmes’ attention to
it. n re was  peculiar dying reference a rat. What could
that mean? It could not be delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow
does not commonly become delirious. No, it was more likely be an
attempt explain how he met hfate. But what could it indicate? I
cudgelled my brains find some possible explanation.  n 
incident of  grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true
 murderer must have dropped some part of hdress, presumably his
overcoat, in hflight,  must have had  hardihood return 
carry it away at  instant when  son was kneeling with hback
turned not a dozen paces off. What a tissue of mysteries 
improbabilities  whole thing was! did not wonder at Lestrade’s
opinion,  yet had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes’ insight that I
could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed strengn
hconviction of young McCarthy’s innocence.

It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, for
Lestrade was staying in lodgings in  town.

“ glass still keeps very high,” he remarked as he sat down. “It is
of importance that it should not rain before we are able go over 
ground. On  or h, a man should be at hvery best  keenest
for such nice work as that,  did not wish do it when fagged by
a long journey. have seen young McCarthy.”

“ what did you learn from him?”

“Nothing.”

“Could he throw no light?”

“None at all. was inclined think at one time that he knew who had
done it  was screening him or her, but am convinced now that he is
as puzzled as everyone else. He not a very quick-witted youth,
though comely look at , should think, sound at heart.”

“cannot admire htaste,” remarked, “if it indeed a fact that
he was averse a marriage with so charming a young lady as thMiss
Turner.”

“Ah, reby hangs a rar painful tale. Thfellow madly,
insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only a
lad,  before he really knew her, for she had been away five years at
a boarding-school, what does  idiot do but get in clutches of
a barmaid in Bristol  marry her at a registry office? No one knows a
word of  matter, but you can imagine how maddening it must be him
be upbraided for not doing what he would give hvery eyes do,
but what he knows be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of
thsort which made him throw hhs up in air when his
far, at ir last interview, was goading him on propose Miss
Turner. On  or h, he had no means of supporting himself, 
hfar, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrown
him over utterly had he known  truth. It was with hbarmaid wife
that he had spent  last three days in Bristol,  hfar did
not know where he was. Mark that point. It of importance. Good has
come out of evil, however, for  barmaid, finding from  papers
that he in serious trouble  likely be hanged, has thrown him
over utterly  has written him say that she has a husb
already in  Bermuda Dockyard, so that re really no tie between
m. think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all
that he has suffered.”

“But if he innocent, who has done it?”

“Ah! who? would call your attention very particularly two points.
One that  murdered man had an appointment with someone at 
pool,  that  someone could not have been hson, for hson was
away,  he did not know when he would return.  second that 
murdered man was heard cry ‘Cooee!’ before he knew that hson had
returned. Those are  crucial points upon which  case depends. 
now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please,  we shall
leave all minor matters until to-morrow.”

re was no rain, as Holmes had foretold,   morning broke bright
 cloudless. At nine o’clock Lestrade called for us with 
carriage,  we set off for Harley Farm   Boscombe Pool.

“re serious news thmorning,” Lestrade observed. “It said
that Mr. Turner, of  Hall, so ill that hlife despaired of.”

“An elderly man, presume?” said Holmes.

“About sixty; but hconstitution has been shattered by hlife
abroad,  he has been in failing health for some time. Thbusiness
has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy’s,
, may add, a great benefactor him, for have learned that he
gave him Harley Farm rent free.”

“Indeed! That interesting,” said Holmes.

“Oh, yes! In a hundred or ways he has helped him. Everybody about
here speaks of hkindness him.”

“Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this
McCarthy, who appears have had little of hown,  have been
under such obligations Turner, should still talk of marrying hson
Turner’s daughter, who is, presumably, heiress  estate, 
that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case of a
proposal  all else would follow? It  more strange, since we
know that Turner himself was averse  idea.  daughter told us
as much. Do you not deduce something from that?”

“We have got  deductions   inferences,” said Lestrade,
winking at me. “find it hard enough tackle facts, Holmes, without
flying away after ories  fancies.”

“You are right,” said Holmes demurely; “you do find it very hard to
tackle  facts.”

“Anyhow, have grasped one fact which you seem find it difficult to
get hold of,” replied Lestrade with some warmth.

“ that is—”

“That McCarthy senior met hdeath from McCarthy junior  that all
ories  contrary are  merest moonshine.”

“Well, moonshine a brighter thing than fog,” said Holmes, laughing.
“But am very much mistaken if thnot Harley Farm upon 
left.”

“Yes, that it.” It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building,
two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon
 grey walls.  drawn blinds   smokeless chimneys, however,
gave it a stricken look, as though  weight of thhorror still lay
heavy upon it. We called at  door, when  maid, at Holmes’
request, showed us  boots which her master wore at  time of his
death,  also a pair of  son’s, though not  pair which he had
n had. Having measured se very carefully from seven or eight
different points, Holmes desired be led  court-yard, from
which we all followed  winding track which led Boscombe Pool.

Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as
this. Men who had only known  quiet thinker  logician of Baker
Street would have failed recognise him. Hface flushed 
darkened. Hbrows were drawn intwo hard black lines, while his
eyes shone out from beneath m with a steely glitter. Hface was
bent downward, hshoulders bowed, hlips compressed,   veins
stood out like whipcord in hlong, sinewy neck. Hnostrils seemed
dilate with a purely animal lust for  chase,  hmind was so
absolutely concentrated upon  matter before him that a question or
remark fell unheeded upon hears, or, at  most, only provoked a
quick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly  silently he made hway
along  track which ran through  meadows,  so by way of 
woods  Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as all that
district,  re were marks of many feet, both upon  path 
amid  short grass which bounded it on eir side. Sometimes Holmes
would hurry on, sometimes stop dead,  once he made quite a little
detour in meadow. Lestrade  walked behind him,  detective
indifferent  contemptuous, while watched my friend with 
interest which sprang from  conviction that every one of hactions
was directed towards a definite end.

 Boscombe Pool, which a little reed-girt sheet of water some
fifty yards across, situated at  boundary between  Harley
Farm   private park of  wealthy Mr. Turner. Above  woods
which lined it upon  farr side we could see  red, jutting
pinnacles which marked  site of  rich lowner’s dwelling. On
 Harley side of  pool  woods grew very thick,  re was
a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between  edge of
 trees   reeds which lined  lake. Lestrade showed us 
exact spot at which  body had been found, , indeed, so moist was
 ground, that could plainly see  traces which had been left by
 fall of  stricken man. Holmes, as could see by heager
face  peering eyes, very many or things were be read upon 
trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who picking up a scent, 
n turned upon my companion.

“What did you go in pool for?” he asked.

“fished about with a rake. thought re might be some weapon or
or trace. But how on earth—”

“Oh, tut, tut! have no time! That left foot of yours with its inward
twist all over  place. A mole could trace it,  re it
vanishes among  reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I
been here before y came like a herd of buffalo  wallowed all over
it. Here where  party with  lodge-keeper came,  y have
covered all tracks for six or eight feet round  body. But here are
three separate tracks of  same feet.” He drew out a lens  lay
down upon hwaterproof have a better view, talking all  time
rar himself than us. “se are young McCarthy’s feet. Twice
he was walking,  once he ran swiftly, so that  soles are deeply
marked   heels hardly visible. That bears out hstory. He ran
when he saw hfar on  ground. n here are  far’s feet
as he paced up  down. What this, n? It  butt-end of 
gun as  son stood listening.  this? Ha, ha! What have we here?
Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! y come, y go,
y come again—of course that was for  cloak. Now where did y
come from?” He ran up  down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding 
track until we were well within  edge of  wood  under 
shadow of a great beech,  largest tree in  neighbourhood. Holmes
traced hway  farr side of th lay down once more upon
hface with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remained
re, turning over  leaves  dried sticks, garing up what
seemed me be dust inan envelope  examining with hlens
not only  ground but even  bark of  tree as far as he could
reach. A jagged stone was lying among  moss,  thalso he
carefully examined  retained. n he followed a pathway through 
wood until he came  highroad, where all traces were lost.

“It has been a case of considerable interest,” he remarked, returning
hnatural manner. “fancy that thgrey house on  right must
be  lodge. think that will go in  have a word with Moran, 
perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back our
luncheon. You may walk  cab,  shall be with you presently.”

It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab  drove back into
Ross, Holmes still carrying with him  stone which he had picked up
in  wood.

“Thmay interest you, Lestrade,” he remarked, holding it out. “
murder was done with it.”

“see no marks.”

“re are none.”

“How do you know, n?”

“ grass was growing under it. It had only lain re a few days.
re was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It corresponds
with  injuries. re no sign of any or weapon.”

“  murderer?”

“a tall man, left-hed, limps with  right leg, wears
thick-soled shooting-boots  a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, uses
a cigar-holder,  carries a blunt pen-knife in hpocket. re are
several or indications, but se may be enough aid us in our
search.”

Lestrade laughed. “am afraid that am still a sceptic,” he said.
“ories are all very well, but we have deal with a hard-headed
British jury.”

“_Nous verrons_,” answered Holmes calmly. “You work your own method,
 shall work mine. shall be busy thafternoon,  shall
probably return London by  evening train.”

“ leave your case unfinished?”

“No, finished.”

“But  mystery?”

“It solved.”

“Who was  criminal, n?”

“ gentleman describe.”

“But who he?”

“Surely it would not be difficult find out. Thnot such a
populous neighbourhood.”

Lestrade shrugged hshoulders. “am a practical man,” he said, “
really cannot undertake go about  country looking for a
left-hed gentleman with a game leg. should become 
laughing-stock of Scotl Yard.”

“All right,” said Holmes quietly. “have given you  chance. Here
are your lodgings. Good-bye. shall drop you a line before leave.”

Having left Lestrade at hrooms, we drove our hotel, where we
found lunch upon  table. Holmes was silent  buried in thought
with a pained expression upon hface, as one who finds himself in a
perplexing position.

“Look here, Watson,” he said when  cloth was cleared “just sit down
in thchair  let me preach you for a little. don’t know quite
what do,  should value your advice. Light a cigar  let me
expound.”

 “Pray do so.”

“Well, now, in considering thcase re are two points about young
McCarthy’s narrative which struck us both instantly, although y
impressed me in hfavour  you against him. One was  fact that
hfar should, according haccount, cry ‘Cooee!’ before seeing
him.  or was hsingular dying reference a rat. He mumbled
several words, you underst, but that was all that caught  son’s
ear. Now from thdouble point our research must commence,  we will
begin it by presuming that what  lad says absolutely true.”

“What of th‘Cooee!’ n?”

“Well, obviously it could not have been meant for  son.  son, as
far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was within
earshot.  ‘Cooee!’ was meant attract  attention of whoever it
was that he had  appointment with. But ‘Cooee’ a distinctly
Australian cry,  one which used between Australians. re a
strong presumption that  person whom McCarthy expected meet him
at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia.”

“What of  rat, n?”

Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from hpocket  flattened it
out on  table. “Tha map of  Colony of Victoria,” he said.
“wired Bristol for it last night.” He put hh over part of
 map. “What do you read?”

“ARAT,” read.

“ now?” He raised hh.

“BALLARAT.”

“Quite so. That was  word  man uttered,  of which hson only
caught  last two syllables. He was trying utter  name of his
murderer. So  so, of Ballarat.”

“It wonderful!” exclaimed.

“It obvious.  now, you see, had narrowed  field down
considerably.  possession of a grey garment was a third point which,
granting  son’s statement be correct, was a certainty. We have
come now out of mere vagueness  definite conception of an
Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak.”

“Certainly.”

“ one who was at home in  district, for  pool can only be
approached by  farm or by  estate, where strangers could hardly
wer.”

“Quite so.”

“n comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of  ground I
gained  trifling details which gave that imbecile Lestrade, as
 personality of  criminal.”

“But how did you gain m?”

“You know my method. It founded upon  observation of trifles.”

“Hheight know that you might roughly judge from  length of his
stride. Hboots, too, might be told from ir traces.”

“Yes, y were peculiar boots.”

“But hlameness?”

“ impression of hright foot was always less distinct than his
left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped—he was lame.”

“But hleft-hedness.”

“You were yourself struck by  nature of  injury as recorded by
 surgeon at  inquest.  blow was struck from immediately
behind,  yet was upon  left side. Now, how can that be unless it
were by a left-hed man? He had stood behind that tree during 
interview between  far  son. He had even smoked re. found
 ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enables
me pronounce as an Indian cigar. have, as you know, devoted some
attention this,  written a little monograph on  ashes of 140
different varieties of pipe, cigar,  cigarette tobacco. Having found
 ash, n looked round  discovered  stump among  moss
where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of  variety which
are rolled in Rotterdam.”

“  cigar-holder?”

“could see that  end had not been in hmouth. refore he used
a holder.  tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but  cut was not
a clean one, so deduced a blunt pen-knife.”

“Holmes,” said, “you have drawn a net round thman from which he
cannot escape,  you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if
you had cut  cord which was hanging him. see  direction in
which all thpoints.  culprit is—”

“Mr. John Turner,” cried  hotel waiter, opening  door of our
sitting-room,  ushering in a visitor.

 man who entered was a strange  impressive figure. Hslow,
limping step  bowed shoulders gave  appearance of decrepitude,
 yet hhard, deep-lined, craggy features,  henormous limbs
showed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body  of
character. Htangled beard, grizzled hair,  outsting, drooping
eyebrows combined give an air of dignity  power his
appearance, but hface was of an ashen white, while hlips  
corners of hnostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear
me at a glance that he was in  grip of some deadly  chronic
disease.

“Pray sit down on  sofa,” said Holmes gently. “You had my note?”

“Yes,  lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished see
me here avoid scal.”

“thought people would talk if went  Hall.”

“ why did you wish see me?” He looked across at my companion with
despair in hweary eyes, as though hquestion was already answered.

“Yes,” said Holmes, answering  look rar than  words. “It is
so. know all about McCarthy.”

 old man sank hface in hhs. “God help me!” he cried. “But I
would not have let  young man come harm. give you my word that
would have spoken out if it went against him at  Assizes.”

“am glad hear you say so,” said Holmes gravely.

“would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would
break her heart—it will break her heart when she hears that am
arrested.”

“It may not come that,” said Holmes.

“What?”

“am no official agent. underst that it was your daughter who
required my presence here,  am acting in her interests. Young
McCarthy must be got off, however.”

“am a dying man,” said old Turner. “have had diabetes for years. My
doctor says it a question wher shall live a month. Yet would
rar die under my own roof than in a gaol.”

Holmes rose  sat down at  table with hpen in hh  a
bundle of paper before him. “Just tell us  truth,” he said. “shall
jot down  facts. You will sign it,  Watson here can witness it.
n could produce your confession at  last extremity save
young McCarthy. promise you that shall not use it unless it is
absolutely needed.”

“It’s as well,” said  old man; “it’s a question wher shall live
 Assizes, so it matters little me, but should wish spare
Alice  shock.  now will make  thing clear you; it has
been a long time in  acting, but will not take me long tell.

“You didn’t know thdead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. I
tell you that. God keep you out of  clutches of such a man as he.
Hgrip has been upon me se twenty years,  he has blasted my
life. I’ll tell you first how came be in hpower.

“It was in  early ’60’s at  diggings. was a young chap n,
hot-blooded  reckless, ready turn my h at anything; got
among bad companions, took drink, had no luck with my claim, took to
 bush,  in a word became what you would call over here a highway
robber. re were six of us,  we had a wild, free life of it,
sticking up a station from time time, or stopping  wagons on 
road  diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was  name went under,
 our party still remembered in  colony as  Ballarat Gang.

“One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat Melbourne,  we lay
in wait for it  attacked it. re were six troopers  six of us,
so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of ir saddles at 
first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before we got 
swag. put my pistol  head of  wagon-driver, who was this
very man McCarthy. wish  Lord that had shot him n, but I
spared him, though saw hwicked little eyes fixed on my face, as
though remember every feature. We got away with  gold, became
wealthy men,  made our way over Engl without being suspected.
re parted from my old pals  determined settle down a
quiet  respectable life. bought thestate, which chanced be
in  market,  set myself do a little good with my money, to
make up for  way in which had earned it. married, too, 
though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice. Even when
she was just a baby her wee h seemed lead me down  right path
as nothing else had ever done. In a word, turned over a new leaf 
did my best make up for  past. All was going well when McCarthy
laid hgrip upon me.

“had gone up town about an investment,  met him in Regent
Street with hardly a coat hback or a boot hfoot.

“‘Here we are, Jack,’ says he, touching me on  arm; ‘we’ll be as
good as a family you. re’s two of us, me  my son,  you can
have  keeping of us. If you don’t—it’s a fine, law-abiding country
Engl,  re’s always a policeman within hail.’

“Well, down y came  west country, re was no shaking m
off,  re y have lived rent free on my best l ever since.
re was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where I
would, re was hcunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew worse
as Alice grew up, for he soon saw was more afraid of her knowing my
past than of  police. Whatever he wanted he must have,  whatever
it was gave him without question, l, money, houses, until at last
he asked a thing which could not give. He asked for Alice.

“Hson, you see, had grown up,  so had my girl,  as was known
be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke him that hlad
should step in whole property. But re was firm. would not
have hcursed stock mixed with mine; not that had any dislike to
 lad, but hblood was in him,  that was enough. stood firm.
McCarthy threatened. braved him do hworst. We were meet at
 pool midway between our houses talk it over.

“When went down re found him talking with hson, so smoked a
cigar  waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as I
listened htalk all that was black  bitter in me seemed come
uppermost. He was urging hson marry my daughter with as little
regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off 
streets. It drove me mad think that  all that held most dear
should be in  power of such a man as this. Could not snap 
bond? was already a dying  a desperate man. Though clear of mind
 fairly strong of limb, knew that my own fate was sealed. But my
memory  my girl! Both could be saved if could but silence that
foul tongue. did it, Mr. Holmes. would do it again. Deeply as I
have sinned, have led a life of martyrdom atone for it. But that
my girl should be entangled in  same meshes which held me was more
than could suffer. struck him down with no more compunction than if
he had been some foul  venomous beast. Hcry brought back hson;
but had gained  cover of  wood, though was forced go back
fetch  cloak which had dropped in my flight. That  true
story, gentlemen, of all that occurred.”

“Well, it not for me judge you,” said Holmes as  old man
signed  statement which had been drawn out. “pray that we may
never be exposed such a temptation.”

“pray not, sir.  what do you intend do?”

“In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you will
soon have answer for your deed at a higher court than  Assizes. I
will keep your confession,  if McCarthy condemned shall be
forced use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; 
your secret, wher you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.”

“Farewell, n,” said  old man solemnly. “Your own deathbeds, when
y come, will be  easier for  thought of  peace which you
have given mine.” Tottering  shaking in all hgiant frame, he
stumbled slowly from  room.

“God help us!” said Holmes after a long silence. “Why does fate play
such tricks with poor, helpless worms? never hear of such a case as
ththat do not think of Baxter’s words,  say, ‘re, but for
 grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.’”

James McCarthy was acquitted at  Assizes on  strength of a number
of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes  submitted 
defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our
interview, but he now dead;  re every prospect that  son
 daughter may come live happily toger in ignorance of 
black cloud which rests upon ir past.



V.  FIVE ORANGE PIPS

When glance over my notes  records of  Sherlock Holmes cases
between  years ’82  ’90, am faced by so many which present
strange  interesting features that it no easy matter know
which choose  which leave. Some, however, have already gained
publicity through  papers,  ors have not offered a field for
those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree,
 which it  object of se papers illustrate. Some, too,
have baffled hanalytical skill,  would be, as narratives,
beginnings without an ending, while ors have been but partially
cleared up,  have ir explanations founded rar upon conjecture
 surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
him. re is, however, one of se last which was so remarkable in
its details  so startling in its results that am tempted give
some account of it in spite of  fact that re are points in
connection with it which never have been,  probably never will be,
entirely cleared up.

 year ’87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or
less interest, of which retain  records. Among my headings under
thone twelve months find an account of  adventure of 
Paradol Chamber, of  Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious
club in  lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of  facts
connected with  loss of  British barque _Sophy erson_, of 
singular adventures of  Grice Patersons in  isl of Uffa, 
finally of  Camberwell poisoning case. In  latter, as may be
remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up  dead man’s
watch, prove that it had been wound up two hours before,  that
refore  deceased had gone bed within that time—a deduction
which was of  greatest importance in clearing up  case. All se
may sketch out at some future date, but none of m present such
singular features as  strange train of circumstances which have
now taken up my pen describe.

It was in  latter days of September,   equinoctial gales had
set in with exceptional violence. All day  wind had screamed  
rain had beaten against  windows, so that even here in  heart of
great, h-made London we were forced raise our minds for 
instant from  routine of life  recognise  presence of those
great elemental forces which shriek at mankind through  bars of his
civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, 
storm grew higher  louder,   wind cried  sobbed like a
child in  chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of 
fireplace cross-indexing hrecords of crime, while at  or was
deep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories until  howl of 
gale from without seemed blend with  text,   splash of 
rain lengn out in long swash of  sea waves. My wife was
on a visit her mor’s,  for a few days was a dweller once
more in my old quarters at Baker Street.

“Why,” said I, glancing up at my companion, “that was surely  bell.
Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?”

“Except yourself have none,” he answered. “do not encourage
visitors.”

“A client, n?”

“If so, it a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on
such a day  at such an hour. But take it that it more likely to
be some crony of  llady’s.”

Sherlock Holmes was wrong in hconjecture, however, for re came a
step in  passage  a tapping at  door. He stretched out his
long arm turn  lamp away from himself  towards  vacant
chair upon which a newcomer must sit.

“Come in!” said he.

 man who entered was young, some two--twenty at  outside,
well-groomed  trimly clad, with something of refinement  delicacy
in hbearing.  streaming umbrella which he held in hh, 
hlong shining waterproof told of  fierce wear through which he
had come. He looked about him anxiously in  glare of  lamp,  I
could see that hface was pale  heyes heavy, like those of a
man who weighed down with some great anxiety.

“owe you an apology,” he said, raising hgolden pince-nez his
eyes. “trust that am not intruding. fear that have brought some
traces of  storm  rain inyour snug chamber.”

“Give me your coat  umbrella,” said Holmes. “y may rest here on
 hook  will be dry presently. You have come up from 
south-west, see.”

“Yes, from Horsham.”

“That clay  chalk mixture which see upon your toe caps quite
distinctive.”

“have come for advice.”

“That easily got.”

“ help.”

“That not always so easy.”

“have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. heard from Major Prendergast how
you saved him in  Tankerville Club scal.”

“Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.”

“He said that you could solve anything.”

“He said too much.”

“That you are never beaten.”

“have been beaten four times—three times by men,  once by a
woman.”

“But what that compared with  number of your successes?”

“It true that have been generally successful.”

“n you may be so with me.”

“beg that you will draw your chair up  fire  favour me with
some details as your case.”

“It no ordinary one.”

“None of those which come me are. am  last court of appeal.”

“ yet question, sir, wher, in all your experience, you have
ever listened a more mysterious  inexplicable chain of events
than those which have happened in my own family.”

“You fill me with interest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us  essential
facts from  commencement,  can afterwards question you as to
those details which seem me be most important.”

 young man pulled hchair up  pushed hwet feet out towards
 blaze.

“My name,” said he, “John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as far
as can underst, little do with thawful business. It a
hereditary matter; so in order give you an idea of  facts, must
go back  commencement of  affair.

“You must know that my grfar had two sons—my uncle Elias  my
far Joseph. My far had a small factory at Coventry, which he
enlarged at  time of  invention of bicycling. He was a patentee
of  Openshaw unbreakable tire,  hbusiness met with such
success that he was able sell it  retire upon a hsome
competence.

“My uncle Elias emigrated America when he was a young man  became
a planter in Florida, where he was reported have done very well. At
 time of  war he fought in Jackson’s army,  afterwards under
Hood, where he rose be a colonel. When Lee laid down harms my
uncle returned hplantation, where he remained for three or four
years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back Europe  took a small
estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very considerable fortune
in  States,  hreason for leaving m was haversion 
negroes,  hdislike of  Republican policy in extending 
franchise m. He was a singular man, fierce  quick-tempered,
very foul-moud when he was angry,  of a most retiring
disposition. During all  years that he lived at Horsham, doubt if
ever he set foot in  town. He had a garden  two or three fields
round hhouse,  re he would take hexercise, though very
often for weeks on end he would never leave hroom. He drank a great
deal of bry  smoked very heavily, but he would see no society 
did not want any friends, not even hown bror.

“He didn’t mind me; in fact, he took a fancy me, for at  time
when he saw me first was a youngster of twelve or so. Thwould be
in  year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in Engl. He
begged my far let me live with him  he was very kind me in
hway. When he was sober he used be fond of playing backgammon 
draughts with me,  he would make me hrepresentative both with 
servants  with  tradespeople, so that by  time that was
sixteen was quite master of  house. kept all  keys  could
go where liked  do what liked, so long as did not disturb him
in hprivacy. re was one singular exception, however, for he had a
single room, a lumber-room up among  attics, which was invariably
locked,  which he would never permit eir me or anyone else to
enter. With a boy’s curiosity have peeped through  keyhole, but I
was never able see more than such a collection of old trunks 
bundles as would be expected in such a room.

“One day—it was in March, 1883—a letter with a foreign stamp lay upon
 table in front of  colonel’s plate. It was not a common thing
for him receive letters, for hbills were all paid in ready money,
 he had no friends of any sort. ‘From India!’ said he as he took it
up, ‘Pondicherry postmark! What can thbe?’ Opening it hurriedly, out
re jumped five little dried orange pips, which pattered down upon
hplate. began laugh at this, but  laugh was struck from my
lips at  sight of hface. Hlip had fallen, heyes were
protruding, hskin  colour of putty,  he glared at  envelope
which he still held in htrembling h, ‘K. K. K.!’ he shrieked, 
n, ‘My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!’

“‘What it, uncle?’ cried.

“‘Death,’ said he,  rising from  table he retired hroom,
leaving me palpitating with horror. took up  envelope  saw
scrawled in red ink upon  inner flap, just above  gum,  letter
K three times repeated. re was nothing else save  five dried
pips. What could be  reason of hoverpowering terror? left 
breakfast-table,  as ascended  stair met him coming down with
an old rusty key, which must have belonged  attic, in one h,
 a small brass box, like a cashbox, in  or.

“‘y may do what y like, but I’ll checkmate m still,’ said he
with an oath. ‘Tell Mary that shall want a fire in my room to-day,
 send down Fordham,  Horsham lawyer.’

“did as he ordered,  when  lawyer arrived was asked step
up  room.  fire was burning brightly,  in  grate re
was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while  brass
box stood open  empty beside it. As glanced at  box noticed,
with a start, that upon  lid was printed  treble K which had
read in  morning upon  envelope.

“‘wish you, John,’ said my uncle, ‘witness my will. leave my
estate, with all its advantages  all its disadvantages, my
bror, your far, whence it will, no doubt, descend you. If you
can enjoy it in peace, well  good! If you find you cannot, take my
advice, my boy,  leave it your deadliest enemy. am sorry to
give you such a two-edged thing, but can’t say what turn things are
going take. Kindly sign  paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.’

“signed  paper as directed,   lawyer took it away with him.
 singular incident made, as you may think,  deepest impression
upon me,  pondered over it  turned it every way in my mind
without being able make anything of it. Yet could not shake off
 vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though  sensation
grew less keen as  weeks passed  nothing happened disturb 
usual routine of our lives. could see a change in my uncle, however.
He drank more than ever,  he was less inclined for any sort of
society. Most of htime he would spend in hroom, with  door
locked upon  inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of
drunken frenzy  would burst out of  house  tear about 
garden with a revolver in hh, screaming out that he was afraid of
no man,  that he was not be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by
man or devil. When se hot fits were over, however, he would rush
tumultuously in at  door  lock  bar it behind him, like a man
who can brazen it out no longer against  terror which lies at 
roots of hsoul. At such times have seen hface, even on a cold
day, glisten with moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.

“Well, come an end of  matter, Mr. Holmes,  not abuse
your patience, re came a night when he made one of those drunken
sallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went to
search for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which lay
at  foot of  garden. re was no sign of any violence,  
water was but two feet deep, so that  jury, having regard his
known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of ‘suicide.’ But I, who knew
how he winced from  very thought of death, had much ado persuade
myself that he had gone out of hway meet it.  matter passed,
however,  my far entered inpossession of  estate,  of
some £ 14,000, which lay hcredit at  bank.”

“One moment,” Holmes interposed, “your statement is, foresee, one of
 most remarkable which have ever listened. Let me have  date
of  reception by your uncle of  letter,   date of his
supposed suicide.”

“ letter arrived on March 10, 1883. Hdeath was seven weeks later,
upon  night of May 2nd.”

“Thank you. Pray proceed.”

“When my far took over  Horsham property, he, at my request, made
a careful examination of  attic, which had been always locked up. We
found  brass box re, although its contents had been destroyed. On
 inside of  cover was a paper label, with  initials of K. K.
K. repeated upon it,  ‘Letters, memora, receipts,  a register’
written beneath. se, we presume, indicated  nature of  papers
which had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For  rest, re was
nothing of much importance in  attic save a great many scattered
papers  note-books bearing upon my uncle’s life in America. Some of
m were of  war time  showed that he had done hduty well 
had borne  repute of a brave soldier. Ors were of a date during
 reconstruction of  Sourn states,  were mostly concerned
with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing 
carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from  North.

“Well, it was  beginning of ’84 when my far came live at
Horsham,  all went as well as possible with us until  January of
’85. On  fourth day after  new year heard my far give a
sharp cry of surprise as we sat toger at  breakfast-table. re
he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one h  five dried
orange pips in  outstretched palm of  or one. He had always
laughed at what he called my cock--bull story about  colonel, but
he looked very scared  puzzled now that  same thing had come upon
himself.

“‘Why, what on earth does thmean, John?’ he stammered.

“My heart had turned lead. ‘It K. K. K.,’ said I.

“He looked inside  envelope. ‘So it is,’ he cried. ‘Here are 
very letters. But what thwritten above m?’

“‘Put  papers on  sundial,’ read, peeping over hshoulder.

“‘What papers? What sundial?’ he asked.

“‘ sundial in  garden. re no or,’ said I; ‘but 
papers must be those that are destroyed.’

“‘Pooh!’ said he, gripping hard at hcourage. ‘We are in a civilised
l here,  we can’t have tomfoolery of thkind. Where does 
thing come from?’

“‘From Dundee,’ answered, glancing at  postmark.

“‘Some preposterous practical joke,’ said he. ‘What have do with
sundials  papers? shall take no notice of such nonsense.’

“‘should certainly speak  police,’ said.

“‘ be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of  sort.’

“‘n let me do so?’

“‘No, forbid you. won’t have a fuss made about such nonsense.’

“It was in vain argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. I
went about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.

“On  third day after  coming of  letter my far went from
home visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who in comm
of one of  forts upon Portsdown Hill. was glad that he should go,
for it seemed me that he was farr from danger when he was away
from home. In that, however, was in error. Upon  second day of his
absence received a telegram from  major, imploring me come at
once. My far had fallen over one of  deep chalk-pits which abound
in  neighbourhood,  was lying senseless, with a shattered skull.
hurried him, but he passed away without having ever recovered his
consciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham in
 twilight,  as  country was unknown him,   chalk-pit
unfenced,  jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of ‘death
from accidental causes.’ Carefully as examined every fact connected
with hdeath, was unable find anything which could suggest 
idea of murder. re were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no
robbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon  roads. 
yet need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease,  that I
was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.

“In thsinister way came inmy inheritance. You will ask me why I
did not dispose of it? answer, because was well convinced that our
troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle’s
life,  that  danger would be as pressing in one house as in
anor.

“It was in January, ’85, that my poor far met hend,  two years
 eight months have elapsed since n. During that time have lived
happily at Horsham,  had begun hope that thcurse had passed
away from  family,  that it had ended with  last generation. I
had begun take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning  blow
fell in  very shape in which it had come upon my far.”

 young man took from hwaistcoat a crumpled envelope,  turning
 table he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.

“Th envelope,” he continued. “ postmark London—eastern
division. Within are  very words which were upon my far’s last
message: ‘K. K. K.’;  n ‘Put  papers on  sundial.’”

“What have you done?” asked Holmes.

“Nothing.”

“Nothing?”

“tell  truth”—he sank hface inhthin, white hs—“have
felt helpless. have felt like one of those poor rabbits when 
snake writhing towards it. seem be in  grasp of some
resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight  no precautions can
guard against.”

“Tut! tut!” cried Sherlock Holmes. “You must act, man, or you are lost.
Nothing but energy can save you. Thno time for despair.”

“have seen  police.”

“Ah!”

“But y listened my story with a smile. am convinced that 
inspector has formed  opinion that  letters are all practical
jokes,  that  deaths of my relations were really accidents, as
 jury stated,  were not be connected with  warnings.”

Holmes shook hclenched hs in  air. “Incredible imbecility!” he
cried.

“y have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in 
house with me.”

“Has he come with you to-night?”

“No. Horders were stay in  house.”

Again Holmes raved in  air.

“Why did you come me?” he said, “, above all, why did you not
come at once?”

“did not know. It was only to-day that spoke Major Prendergast
about my troubles  was advised by him come you.”

“It really two days since you had  letter. We should have acted
before this. You have no furr evidence, suppose, than that which
you have placed before us—no suggestive detail which might help us?”

“re one thing,” said John Openshaw. He rummaged in hcoat
pocket, , drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper, he
laid it out upon  table. “have some remembrance,” said he, “that
on  day when my uncle burned  papers observed that  small,
unburned margins which lay amid  ashes were of thparticular
colour. found thsingle sheet upon  floor of hroom,  am
inclined think that it may be one of  papers which has, perhaps,
fluttered out from among  ors,  in that way has escaped
destruction. Beyond  mention of pips, do not see that it helps us
much. think myself that it a page from some private diary. 
writing undoubtedly my uncle’s.”

Holmes moved  lamp,  we both bent over  sheet of paper, which
showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book. It
was headed, “March, 1869,”  beneath were  following enigmatical
notices:

“4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.

“7th. Set  pips on McCauley, Paramore,  John Swain of St.
Augustine.

“9th. McCauley cleared.

“10th. John Swain cleared.

“12th. Visited Paramore. All well.”

“Thank you!” said Holmes, folding up  paper  returning it our
visitor. “ now you must on no account lose anor instant. We
cannot spare time even discuss what you have told me. You must get
home instantly  act.”

“What shall do?”

“re but one thing do. It must be done at once. You must put
thpiece of paper which you have shown us in brass box which
you have described. You must also put in a note say that all 
or papers were burned by your uncle,  that th only one
which remains. You must assert that in such words as will carry
conviction with m. Having done this, you must at once put  box
out upon  sundial, as directed. Do you underst?”

“Entirely.”

“Do not think of revenge, or anything of  sort, at present. think
that we may gain that by means of  law; but we have our web to
weave, while irs already woven.  first consideration to
remove  pressing danger which threatens you.  second clear
up  mystery  punish  guilty parties.”

“thank you,” said  young man, rising  pulling on hovercoat.
“You have given me fresh life  hope. shall certainly do as you
advise.”

“Do not lose an instant. , above all, take care of yourself in 
meanwhile, for do not think that re can be a doubt that you are
threatened by a very real  imminent danger. How do you go back?”

“By train from Waterloo.”

“It not yet nine.  streets will be crowded, so trust that you
may be in safety.  yet you cannot guard yourself too closely.”

“am armed.”

“That well. To-morrow shall set work upon your case.”

“shall see you at Horsham, n?”

“No, your secret lies in London. It re that shall seek it.”

“n shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to
 box   papers. shall take your advice in every particular.”
He shook hs with us  took hleave. Outside  wind still
screamed   rain splashed  pattered against  windows. This
strange, wild story seemed have come us from amid  mad
elements—blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale— now to
have been reabsorbed by m once more.

Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with hhead sunk
forward  heyes bent upon  red glow of  fire. n he lit
hpipe,  leaning back in hchair he watched  blue smoke-rings
as y chased each or up  ceiling.

“think, Watson,” he remarked at last, “that of all our cases we have
had none more fantastic than this.”

“Save, perhaps,  Sign of Four.”

“Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that.  yet thJohn Openshaw seems me
be walking amid even greater perils than did  Sholtos.”

“But have you,” asked, “formed any definite conception as what
se perils are?”

“re can be no question as ir nature,” he answered.

“n what are y? Who thK. K. K.,  why does he pursue this
unhappy family?”

Sherlock Holmes closed heyes  placed helbows upon  arms of
hchair, with hfinger-tips toger. “ ideal reasoner,” he
remarked, “would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all its
bearings, deduce from it not only all  chain of events which led up
it but also all  results which would follow from it. As Cuvier
could correctly describe a whole animal by  contemplation of a
single bone, so  observer who has thoroughly understood one link in
a series of incidents should be able accurately state all  or
ones, both before  after. We have not yet grasped  results which
 reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in  study
which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by  aid of
ir senses. carry  art, however, its highest pitch, it is
necessary that  reasoner should be able utilise all  facts
which have come hknowledge;  thin itself implies, as you
will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in se
days of free education  encyclopædias, a somewhat rare
accomplishment. It not so impossible, however, that a man should
possess all knowledge which likely be useful him in hwork,
 thhave endeavoured in my case do. If remember rightly,
you on one occasion, in  early days of our friendship, defined my
limits in a very precise fashion.”

“Yes,” answered, laughing. “It was a singular document. Philosophy,
astronomy,  politics were marked at zero, remember. Botany
variable, geology profound as regards  mud-stains from any region
within fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic,
sensational literature  crime records unique, violin-player, boxer,
swordsman, lawyer,  self-poisoner by cocaine  tobacco. Those, I
think, were  main points of my analysis.”

Holmes grinned at  last item. “Well,” he said, “say now, as said
n, that a man should keep hlittle brain-attic stocked with all
 furniture that he likely use,   rest he can put away in
 lumber-room of hlibrary, where he can get it if he wants it.
Now, for such a case as  one which has been submitted us
to-night, we need certainly muster all our resources. Kindly h me
down  letter K of  _American Encyclopædia_ which sts upon 
shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider  situation  see
what may be deduced from it. In  first place, we may start with a
strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason
for leaving America. Men at htime of life do not change all ir
habits  exchange willingly  charming climate of Florida for 
lonely life of an English provincial town. Hextreme love of solitude
in Engl suggests  idea that he was in fear of someone or
something, so we may assume as a working hyposthat it was fear of
someone or something which drove him from America. As what it was he
feared, we can only deduce that by considering  formidable letters
which were received by himself  hsuccessors. Did you remark 
postmarks of those letters?”

“ first was from Pondicherry,  second from Dundee,   third
from London.”

“From East London. What do you deduce from that?”

“y are all seaports. That  writer was on board of a ship.”

“Excellent. We have already a clue. re can be no doubt that 
probability— strong probability—that  writer was on board of a
ship.  now let us consider anor point. In  case of
Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between  threat  its fulfilment,
in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that suggest
anything?”

“A greater distance travel.”

“But  letter had also a greater distance come.”

“n do not see  point.”

“re at least a presumption that  vessel in which  man or
men are a sailing-ship. It looks as if y always send ir
singular warning or token before m when starting upon ir mission.
You see how quickly  deed followed  sign when it came from
Dundee. If y had come from Pondicherry in a steamer y would have
arrived almost as soon as ir letter. But, as a matter of fact, seven
weeks elapsed. think that those seven weeks represented 
difference between  mail-boat which brought  letter  
sailing vessel which brought  writer.”

“It possible.”

“More than that. It probable.  now you see  deadly urgency of
thnew case,  why urged young Openshaw caution.  blow has
always fallen at  end of  time which it would take  senders to
travel  distance. But thone comes from London,  refore we
cannot count upon delay.”

“Good God!” cried. “What can it mean, threlentless persecution?”

“ papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance to
 person or persons in  sailing-ship. think that it quite
clear that re must be more than one of m. A single man could not
have carried out two deaths in such a way as deceive a coroner’s
jury. re must have been several in it,  y must have been men
of resource  determination. ir papers y mean have, be 
holder of m who it may. In thway you see K. K. K. ceases be
 initials of an individual  becomes  badge of a society.”

“But of what society?”

“Have you never—” said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward  sinking his
voice—“have you never heard of  Ku Klux Klan?”

“never have.”

Holmes turned over  leaves of  book upon hknee. “Here it is,”
said he presently:

“‘Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from  fanciful resemblance 
sound produced by cocking a rifle. Thterrible secret society was
formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in  Sourn states after 
Civil War,  it rapidly formed local branches in different parts of
 country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana,  Carolinas, Georgia,
 Florida. Its power was used for political purposes, principally for
 terrorising of  negro voters   murdering  driving from
 country of those who were opposed its views. Its outrages were
usually preceded by a warning sent  marked man in some fantastic
but generally recognised shape—a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts,
melon seeds or orange pips in ors. On receiving th victim
might eir openly abjure hformer ways, or might fly from 
country. If he braved  matter out, death would unfailingly come upon
him,  usually in some strange  unforeseen manner. So perfect was
 organisation of  society,  so systematic its methods, that
re hardly a case upon record where any man succeeded in braving
it with impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home to
 perpetrators. For some years  organisation flourished in spite
of  efforts of  United States government  of  better
classes of  community in  South. Eventually, in  year 1869,
 movement rar suddenly collapsed, although re have been
sporadic outbreaks of  same sort since that date.’

“You will observe,” said Holmes, laying down  volume, “that 
sudden breaking up of  society was coincident with  disappearance
of Openshaw from America with ir papers. It may well have been cause
 effect. It no wonder that he  hfamily have some of 
more implacable spirits upon ir track. You can underst that this
register  diary may implicate some of  first men in  South,
 that re may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is
recovered.”

“n  page we have seen—”

“such as we might expect. It ran, if remember right, ‘sent 
pips A, B,  C’—that is, sent  society’s warning m. n
re are successive entries that A  B cleared, or left  country,
 finally that C was visited, with, fear, a sinister result for C.
Well, think, Doctor, that we may let some light inthdark place,
 believe that  only chance young Openshaw has in  meantime
do what have told him. re nothing more be said or to
be done to-night, so h me over my violin  let us try forget
for half an hour  miserable wear   still more miserable
ways of our fellow men.”

It had cleared in  morning,   sun was shining with a subdued
brightness through  dim veil which hangs over  great city.
Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when came down.

“You will excuse me for not waiting for you,” said he; “have, I
foresee, a very busy day before me in looking inthcase of young
Openshaw’s.”

“What steps will you take?” asked.

“It will very much depend upon  results of my first inquiries. may
have go down Horsham, after all.”

“You will not go re first?”

“No, shall commence with  City. Just ring  bell   maid
will bring up your coffee.”

As waited, lifted  unopened newspaper from  table  glanced
my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill my
heart.

“Holmes,” cried, “you are too late.”

“Ah!” said he, laying down hcup, “feared as much. How was it
done?” He spoke calmly, but could see that he was deeply moved.

“My eye caught  name of Openshaw,   heading ‘Tragedy Near
Waterloo Bridge.’ Here  account:

“‘Between nine  ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of  H
Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help  a
splash in  water.  night, however, was extremely dark  stormy,
so that, in spite of  help of several passers-by, it was quite
impossible effect a rescue.  alarm, however, was given, , by
 aid of  water-police,  body was eventually recovered. It
proved be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appears from
an envelope which was found in hpocket, was John Openshaw,  whose
residence near Horsham. It conjectured that he may have been
hurrying down catch  last train from Waterloo Station,  that
in hhaste   extreme darkness he missed hpath  walked
over  edge of one of  small ling-places for river steamboats.
 body exhibited no traces of violence,  re can be no doubt
that  deceased had been  victim of an unfortunate accident, which
should have  effect of calling  attention of  authorities to
 condition of  riverside ling-stages.’”

We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed  shaken
than had ever seen him.

“That hurts my pride, Watson,” he said at last. “It a petty feeling,
no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with me
now, , if God sends me health, shall set my h upon thgang.
That he should come me for help,  that should send him away to
hdeath—!” He sprang from hchair  paced about  room in
uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon hsallow cheeks  a
nervous clasping  unclasping of hlong thin hs.

“y must be cunning devils,” he exclaimed at last. “How could y
have decoyed him down re?  Embankment not on  direct line
 station.  bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a
night, for ir purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win in
 long run. am going out now!”

“ police?”

“No; shall be my own police. When have spun  web y may take
 flies, but not before.”

All day was engaged in my professional work,  it was late in 
evening before returned Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not come
back yet. It was nearly ten o’clock before he entered, looking pale 
worn. He walked up  sideboard,  tearing a piece from  loaf
he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draught of
water.

“You are hungry,” remarked.

“Starving. It had escaped my memory. have had nothing since
breakfast.”

“Nothing?”

“Not a bite. had no time think of it.”

“ how have you succeeded?”

“Well.”

“You have a clue?”

“have m in  hollow of my h. Young Openshaw shall not long
remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put ir own devilish trade-mark
upon m. It well thought of!”

“What do you mean?”

He took an orange from  cupboard,  tearing it pieces he
squeezed out  pips upon  table. Of se he took five  thrust
m inan envelope. On  inside of  flap he wrote “S. H. for J.
O.” n he sealed it  addressed it “Captain James Calhoun,
Barque _Lone Star_, Savannah, Georgia.”

“That will await him when he enters port,” said he, chuckling. “It may
give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of his
fate as Openshaw did before him.”

“ who thCaptain Calhoun?”

“ leader of  gang. shall have  ors, but he first.”

“How did you trace it, n?”

He took a large sheet of paper from hpocket, all covered with dates
 names.

“have spent  whole day,” said he, “over Lloyd’s registers 
files of  old papers, following  future career of every vessel
which touched at Pondicherry in January  February in ’83. re were
thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported re during those
months. Of se, one,  _Lone Star_, instantly attracted my
attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from
London,  name that which given one of  states of 
Union.”

“Texas, think.”

“was not  am not sure which; but knew that  ship must have an
American origin.”

“What n?”

“searched  Dundee records,  when found that  barque _Lone
Star_ was re in January, ’85, my suspicion became a certainty. I
n inquired as  vessels which lay at present in  port of
London.”

“Yes?”

“ _Lone Star_ had arrived here last week. went down  Albert
Dock  found that she had been taken down  river by  early tide
thmorning, homeward bound Savannah. wired Gravesend 
learned that she had passed some time ago,  as  wind easterly
have no doubt that she now past  Goodwins  not very far from
 Isle of Wight.”

“What will you do, n?”

“Oh, have my h upon him. He   two mates, are as learn, 
only native-born Americans in  ship.  ors are Finns 
Germans. know, also, that y were all three away from  ship last
night. had it from  stevedore who has been loading ir cargo. By
 time that ir sailing-ship reaches Savannah  mail-boat will
have carried thletter,   cable will have informed  police
of Savannah that se three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a
charge of murder.”

re ever a flaw, however, in  best laid of human plans,  
murderers of John Openshaw were never receive  orange pips which
would show m that anor, as cunning  as resolute as mselves,
was upon ir track. Very long  very severe were  equinoctial
gales that year. We waited long for news of  _Lone Star_ of
Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear that somewhere
far out in  Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen
swinging in  trough of a wave, with  letters “L. S.” carved upon
it,  that all which we shall ever know of  fate of  _Lone
Star_.



VI.  MAN WITH  TWISTED LIP

Isa Whitney, bror of  late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of 
ological College of St. George’s, was much addicted opium. 
habit grew upon him, as underst, from some foolish freak when he
was at college; for having read De Quincey’s description of hdreams
 sensations, he had drenched htobacco with laudanum in an attempt
produce  same effects. He found, as so many more have done, that
 practice easier attain than get rid of,  for many years
he continued be a slave  drug, an object of mingled horror 
pity hfriends  relatives. can see him now, with yellow,
pasty face, drooping lids,  pin-point pupils, all huddled in a
chair,  wreck  ruin of a noble man.

One night—it was in June, ’89—re came a ring my bell, about 
hour when a man gives hfirst yawn  glances at  clock. sat up
in my chair,  my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap  made
a little face of disappointment.

“A patient!” said she. “You’ll have go out.”

groaned, for was newly come back from a weary day.

We heard  door open, a few hurried words,  n quick steps upon
 linoleum. Our own door flew open,  a lady, clad in some
dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered  room.

“You will excuse my calling so late,” she began,  n, suddenly
losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my
wife’s neck,  sobbed upon her shoulder. “Oh, I’m in such trouble!”
she cried; “do so want a little help.”

“Why,” said my wife, pulling up her veil, “it Kate Whitney. How you
startled me, Kate! had not an idea who you were when you came in.”

“didn’t know what do, so came straight you.” That was always
 way. Folk who were in grief came my wife like birds a
lighthouse.

“It was very sweet of you come. Now, you must have some wine 
water,  sit here comfortably  tell us all about it. Or should you
rar that sent James off bed?”

“Oh, no, no! want  doctor’s advice  help, too. It’s about Isa.
He has not been home for two days. am so frightened about him!”

It was not  first time that she had spoken us of her husb’s
trouble, me as a doctor, my wife as an old friend  school
companion. We sood  comforted her by such words as we could find.
Did she know where her husb was? Was it possible that we could bring
him back her?

It seems that it was. She had  surest information that of late he
had, when  fit was on him, made use of an opium den in  farst
east of  City. Hirhorgies had always been confined one
day,  he had come back, twitching  shattered, in  evening. But
now  spell had been upon him eight--forty hours,  he lay
re, doubtless among  dregs of  docks, breathing in  poison
or sleeping off  effects. re he was be found, she was sure of
it, at  Bar of Gold, in Upper Swam Lane. But what was she do?
How could she, a young  timid woman, make her way insuch a place
 pluck her husb out from among  ruffians who surrounded him?

re was  case,  of course re was but one way out of it.
Might not escort her thplace?  n, as a second thought,
why should she come at all? was Isa Whitney’s medical adviser,  as
such had influence over him. could manage it better if were
alone. promised her on my word that would send him home in a cab
within two hours if he were indeed at  address which she had given
me.  so in ten minutes had left my armchair  cheery
sitting-room behind me,  was speeding eastward in a hansom on a
strange err, as it seemed me at  time, though  future only
could show how strange it was be.

But re was no great difficulty in  first stage of my adventure.
Upper Swam Lane a vile alley lurking behind  high wharves
which line  north side of  river  east of London Bridge.
Between a slop-shop  a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight of
steps leading down a black gap like  mouth of a cave, found 
den of which was in search. Ordering my cab wait, passed down
 steps, worn hollow in  centre by  ceaseless tread of drunken
feet;  by  light of a flickering oil-lamp above  door found
 latch  made my way ina long, low room, thick  heavy with
 brown opium smoke,  terraced with wooden berths, like 
forecastle of an emigrant ship.

Through  gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying in
strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown
back,  chins pointing upward, with here  re a dark,
lack-lustre eye turned upon  newcomer. Out of  black shadows
re glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as
 burning poison waxed or waned in  bowls of  metal pipes. 
most lay silent, but some muttered mselves,  ors talked
toger in a strange, low, monotonous voice, ir conversation coming
in gushes,  n suddenly tailing off insilence, each mumbling
out hown thoughts  paying little heed  words of his
neighbour. At  farr end was a small brazier of burning charcoal,
beside which on a three-legged wooden stool re sat a tall, thin old
man, with hjaw resting upon htwo fists,  helbows upon his
knees, staring in fire.

As entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe for
me  a supply of  drug, beckoning me an empty berth.

“Thank you. have not come stay,” said I. “re a friend of
mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney,  wish speak with him.”

re was a movement  an exclamation from my right,  peering
through  gloom, saw Whitney, pale, haggard,  unkempt, staring
out at me.

“My God! It’s Watson,” said he. He was in a pitiable state of reaction,
with every nerve in a twitter. “say, Watson, what o’clock it?”

“Nearly eleven.”

“Of what day?”

“Of Friday, June 19th.”

“Good heavens! thought it was Wednesday. It Wednesday. What d’you
want frighten a chap for?” He sank hface onharms  began
sob in a high treble key.

“tell you that it Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting thtwo
days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!”

“So am. But you’ve got mixed, Watson, for have only been here a few
hours, three pipes, four pipes—forget how many. But I’ll go home with
you. wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me your h! Have
you a cab?”

“Yes, have one waiting.”

“n shall go in it. But must owe something. Find what owe,
Watson. am all off colour. can do nothing for myself.”

walked down  narrow passage between  double row of sleepers,
holding my breath keep out  vile, stupefying fumes of  drug,
 looking about for  manager. As passed  tall man who sat by
 brazier felt a sudden pluck at my skirt,  a low voice
whispered, “Walk past me,  n look back at me.”  words fell
quite distinctly upon my ear. glanced down. y could only have come
from  old man at my side,  yet he sat now as absorbed as ever,
very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down
from between hknees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude
from hfingers. took two steps forward  looked back. It took all
my self-control prevent me from breaking out ina cry of
astonishment. He had turned hback so that none could see him but I.
Hform had filled out, hwrinkles were gone,  dull eyes had
regained ir fire,  re, sitting by  fire  grinning at my
surprise, was none or than Sherlock Holmes. He made a slight motion
me approach him,  instantly, as he turned hface half round
 company once more, subsided ina doddering, loose-lipped
senility.

“Holmes!” whispered, “what on earth are you doing in thden?”

“As low as you can,” he answered; “have excellent ears. If you would
have  great kindness get rid of that sottish friend of yours I
should be exceedingly glad have a little talk with you.”

“have a cab outside.”

“n pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he
appears be too limp get inany mischief. should recommend you
also send a note by  cabman your wife say that you have
thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, shall be with
you in five minutes.”

It was difficult refuse any of Sherlock Holmes’ requests, for y
were always so exceedingly definite,  put forward with such a quiet
air of mastery. felt, however, that when Whitney was once confined in
 cab my mission was practically accomplished;  for  rest, I
could not wish anything better than be associated with my friend in
one of those singular adventures which were  normal condition of his
existence. In a few minutes had written my note, paid Whitney’s bill,
led him out  cab,  seen him driven through  darkness. In a
very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from  opium den,  I
was walking down  street with Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he
shuffled along with a bent back  an uncertain foot. n, glancing
quickly round, he straightened himself out  burst ina hearty fit
of laughter.

“suppose, Watson,” said he, “that you imagine that have added
opium-smoking cocaine injections,  all  or little
weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views.”

“was certainly surprised find you re.”

“But not more so than find you.”

“came find a friend.”

“ find an enemy.”

“An enemy?”

“Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall say, my natural prey.
Briefly, Watson, am in  midst of a very remarkable inquiry,  I
have hoped find a clue in  incoherent ramblings of se sots, as
have done before now. Had been recognised in that den my life would
not have been worth an hour’s purchase; for have used it before now
for my own purposes,   rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to
have vengeance upon me. re a trap-door at  back of that
building, near  corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell some
strange tales of what has passed through it upon  moonless nights.”

“What! You do not mean bodies?”

“Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for every
poor devil who has been done death in that den. It  vilest
murder-trap on  whole riverside,  fear that Neville St. Clair
has entered it never leave it more. But our trap should be here.” He
put htwo forefingers between hteeth  whistled shrilly—a signal
which was answered by a similar whistle from  distance, followed
shortly by  rattle of wheels   clink of horses’ hoofs.

“Now, Watson,” said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through 
gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side
lanterns. “You’ll come with me, won’t you?”

“If can be of use.”

“Oh, a trusty comrade always of use;  a chronicler still more so.
My room at  Cedars a double-bedded one.”

“ Cedars?”

“Yes; that Mr. St. Clair’s house. am staying re while conduct
 inquiry.”

“Where it, n?”

“Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us.”

“But am all in  dark.”

“Of course you are. You’ll know all about it presently. Jump up here.
All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s half a crown. Look out
for me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, n!”

He flicked  horse with hwhip,  we dashed away through 
endless succession of sombre  deserted streets, which widened
gradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, with
 murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay anor dull
wilderness of bricks  mortar, its silence broken only by  heavy,
regular footfall of  policeman, or  songs  shouts of some
belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across 
sky,  a star or two twinkled dimly here  re through  rifts
of  clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with hhead sunk upon his
breast,   air of a man who lost in thought, while sat beside
him, curious learn what thnew quest might be which seemed tax
hpowers so sorely,  yet afraid break in upon  current of
hthoughts. We had driven several miles,  were beginning get to
 fringe of  belt of suburban villas, when he shook himself,
shrugged hshoulders,  lit up hpipe with  air of a man who
has satisfied himself that he acting for  best.

“You have a gr gift of silence, Watson,” said he. “It makes you
quite invaluable as a companion. ’Pon my word, it a great thing for
me have someone talk to, for my own thoughts are not
over-pleasant. was wondering what should say thdear little
woman to-night when she meets me at  door.”

“You forget that know nothing about it.”

“shall just have time tell you  facts of  case before we get
Lee. It seems absurdly simple,  yet, somehow can get nothing to
go upon. re’s plenty of thread, no doubt, but can’t get  end of
it inmy h. Now, I’ll state  case clearly  concisely you,
Watson,  maybe you can see a spark where all dark me.”

“Proceed, n.”

“Some years ago—be definite, in May, 1884—re came Lee a
gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared have plenty of
money. He took a large villa, laid out  grounds very nicely, 
lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in 
neighbourhood,  in 1887 he married  daughter of a local brewer,
by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was
interested in several companies  went intown as a rule in 
morning, returning by  5:14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr. St.
Clair now thirty-seven years of age, a man of temperate habits, a
good husb, a very affectionate far,  a man who popular with
all who know him. may add that hwhole debts at  present moment,
as far as we have been able ascertain, amount £ 88 10_s_., while
he has £ 220 sting hcredit in  Capital  Counties Bank.
re no reason, refore, think that money troubles have been
weighing upon hmind.

“Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went intown rar earlier than
usual, remarking before he started that he had two important
commissions perform,  that he would bring hlittle boy home a
box of bricks. Now, by  merest chance, hwife received a telegram
upon thsame Monday, very shortly after hdeparture,  effect
that a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expecting
was waiting for her at  offices of  Aberdeen Shipping Company.
Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that  office
of  company in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swam
Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch,
started for  City, did some shopping, proceeded  company’s
office, got her packet,  found herself at exactly 4:35 walking
through Swam Lane on her way back  station. Have you followed
me so far?”

“It very clear.”

“If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day,  Mrs. St. Clair
walked slowly, glancing about in  hope of seeing a cab, as she did
not like  neighbourhood in which she found herself. While she was
walking in thway down Swam Lane, she suddenly heard an
ejaculation or cry,  was struck cold see her husb looking down
at her , as it seemed her, beckoning her from a second-floor
window.  window was open,  she distinctly saw hface, which she
describes as being terribly agitated. He waved hhs frantically to
her,  n vanished from  window so suddenly that it seemed to
her that he had been plucked back by some irresistible force from
behind. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was that
although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started town in, he
had on neir collar nor necktie.

“Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down 
steps—for  house was none or than  opium den in which you
found me to-night— running through  front room she attempted to
ascend  stairs which led  first floor. At  foot of 
stairs, however, she met thLascar scoundrel of whom have spoken,
who thrust her back , aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant re,
pushed her out in street. Filled with  most maddening doubts
 fears, she rushed down  lane , by rare good-fortune, met in
Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all on ir
way ir beat.  inspector  two men accompanied her back, 
in spite of  continued resistance of  proprietor, y made ir
way  room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. re was no
sign of him re. In fact, in  whole of that floor re was no one
be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems,
made hhome re. Both he   Lascar stoutly swore that no one
else had been in  front room during  afternoon. So determined was
ir denial that  inspector was staggered,  had almost come to
believe that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded when, with a cry, she
sprang at a small deal box which lay upon  table  tore  lid
from it. Out re fell a cascade of children’s bricks. It was  toy
which he had promised bring home.

“Thdiscovery,   evident confusion which  cripple showed,
made  inspector realise that  matter was serious.  rooms were
carefully examined,  results all pointed an abominable crime. 
front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room  led ina small
bedroom, which looked out upon  back of one of  wharves. Between
 wharf   bedroom window a narrow strip, which dry at low
tide but covered at high tide with at least four  a half feet of
water.  bedroom window was a broad one  opened from below. On
examination traces of blood were be seen upon  windowsill, 
several scattered drops were visible upon  wooden floor of 
bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in  front room were all 
clos of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with  exception of hcoat. His
boots, hsocks, hhat,  hwatch—all were re. re were no
signs of violence upon any of se garments,  re were no or
traces of Mr. Neville St. Clair. Out of  window he must apparently
have gone for no or exit could be discovered,   ominous
bloodstains upon  sill gave little promise that he could save
himself by swimming, for  tide was at its very highest at  moment
of  tragedy.

“ now as  villains who seemed be immediately implicated in
 matter.  Lascar was known be a man of  vilest antecedents,
but as, by Mrs. St. Clair’s story, he was known have been at 
foot of  stair within a very few seconds of her husb’s appearance
at  window, he could hardly have been more than an accessory 
crime. Hdefence was one of absolute ignorance,  he protested that
he had no knowledge as  doings of Hugh Boone, hlodger, 
that he could not account in any way for  presence of  missing
gentleman’s clos.

“So much for  Lascar manager. Now for  sinister cripple who lives
upon  second floor of  opium den,  who was certainly  last
human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. Hname Hugh
Boone,  hhideous face one which familiar every man who
goes much  City. He a professional beggar, though in order to
avoid  police regulations he pretends a small trade in wax
vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon 
left-h side, re is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in
 wall. Here it that thcreature takes hdaily seat,
cross-legged with htiny stock of matches on hlap,  as he a
piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends in greasy
lear cap which lies upon  pavement beside him. have watched 
fellow more than once before ever thought of making hprofessional
acquaintance,  have been surprised at  harvest which he has
reaped in a short time. Happearance, you see, so remarkable that
no one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, a
pale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, has
turned up  outer edge of hupper lip, a bulldog chin,  a pair
of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast 
colour of hhair, all mark him out from amid  common crowd of
mendicants  so, too, does hwit, for he ever ready with a reply
any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by  passers-by.
Th man whom we now learn have been  lodger at  opium
den,  have been  last man see  gentleman of whom we are
in quest.”

“But a cripple!” said I. “What could he have done single-hed against
a man in  prime of life?”

“He a cripple in  sense that he walks with a limp; but in or
respects he appears be a powerful  well-nurtured man. Surely your
medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is
often compensated for by exceptional strength in  ors.”

“Pray continue your narrative.”

“Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at  sight of  blood upon  window,
 she was escorted home in a cab by  police, as her presence could
be of no help m in ir investigations. Inspector Barton, who
had charge of  case, made a very careful examination of 
premises, but without finding anything which threw any light upon 
matter. One mistake had been made in not arresting Boone instantly, as
he was allowed some few minutes during which he might have communicated
with hfriend  Lascar, but thfault was soon remedied,  he
was seized  searched, without anything being found which could
incriminate him. re were, it true, some blood-stains upon his
right shirt-sleeve, but he pointed hring-finger, which had been
cut near  nail,  explained that  bleeding came from re,
adding that he had been  window not long before,  that 
stains which had been observed re came doubtless from  same
source. He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clair
 swore that  presence of  clos in hroom was as much a
mystery him as  police. As Mrs. St. Clair’s assertion that
she had actually seen her husb at  window, he declared that she
must have been eir mad or dreaming. He was removed, loudly
protesting,  police-station, while  inspector remained upon
 premises in  hope that  ebbing tide might afford some fresh
clue.

“ it did, though y hardly found upon  mud-bank what y had
feared find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat,  not Neville St.
Clair, which lay uncovered as  tide receded.  what do you think
y found in  pockets?”

“cannot imagine.”

“No, don’t think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies
 half-pennies—421 pennies  270 half-pennies. It was no wonder
that it had not been swept away by  tide. But a human body a
different matter. re a fierce eddy between  wharf  
house. It seemed likely enough that  weighted coat had remained when
 stripped body had been sucked away in river.”

“But underst that all  or clos were found in  room.
Would  body be dressed in a coat alone?”

“No, sir, but  facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that
thman Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through  window, re
no human eye which could have seen  deed. What would he do n?
It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of 
tell-tale garments. He would seize  coat, n,  be in  act of
throwing it out, when it would occur him that it would swim  not
sink. He has little time, for he has heard  scuffle downstairs when
 wife tried force her way up,  perhaps he has already heard
from hLascar confederate that  police are hurrying up  street.
re not an instant be lost. He rushes some secret hoard,
where he has accumulated  fruits of hbeggary,  he stuffs all
 coins upon which he can lay hhs in pockets make sure
of  coat’s sinking. He throws it out,  would have done  same
with  or garments had not he heard  rush of steps below, 
only just had time close  window when  police appeared.”

“It certainly sounds feasible.”

“Well, we will take it as a working hyposfor want of a better.
Boone, as have told you, was arrested  taken  station, but
it could not be shown that re had ever before been anything against
him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but hlife
appeared have been a very quiet  innocent one. re  matter
sts at present,   questions which have be solved—what
Neville St. Clair was doing in  opium den, what happened him when
re, where he now,  what Hugh Boone had do with his
disappearance—are all as far from a solution as ever. confess that I
cannot recall any case within my experience which looked at  first
glance so simple  yet which presented such difficulties.”

While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing thsingular series of
events, we had been whirling through  outskirts of  great town
until  last straggling houses had been left behind,  we rattled
along with a country hedge upon eir side of us. Just as he finished,
however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a few lights
still glimmered in  windows.

“We are on  outskirts of Lee,” said my companion. “We have touched
on three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,
passing over an angle of Surrey,  ending in Kent. See that light
among  trees? That  Cedars,  beside that lamp sits a woman
whose anxious ears have already, have little doubt, caught  clink
of our horse’s feet.”

“But why are you not conducting  case from Baker Street?” asked.

“Because re are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs. St.
Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal,  you may rest
assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend 
colleague. hate meet her, Watson, when have no news of her
husb. Here we are. Whoa, re, whoa!”

We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own
grounds. A stable-boy had run out  horse’s head,  springing
down, followed Holmes up  small, winding gravel-drive which led to
 house. As we approached,  door flew open,  a little blonde
woman stood in  opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline de
soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck  wrists. She
stood with her figure outlined against  flood of light, one h
upon  door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly
bent, her head  face protruded, with eager eyes  parted lips, a
sting question.

“Well?” she cried, “well?”  n, seeing that re were two of us,
she gave a cry of hope which sank ina groan as she saw that my
companion shook hhead  shrugged hshoulders.

“No good news?”

“None.”

“No bad?”

“No.”

“Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had a
long day.”

“Thmy friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use me in
several of my cases,  a lucky chance has made it possible for me to
bring him out  associate him with thinvestigation.”

“am delighted see you,” said she, pressing my h warmly. “You
will, am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our
arrangements, when you consider  blow which has come so suddenly
upon us.”

“My dear madam,” said I, “am an old campaigner,  if were not I
can very well see that no apology needed. If can be of any
assistance, eir you or my friend here, shall be indeed
happy.”

“Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said  lady as we entered a well-lit
dining-room, upon  table of which a cold supper had been laid out,
“should very much like ask you one or two plain questions, to
which beg that you will give a plain answer.”

“Certainly, madam.”

“Do not trouble about my feelings. am not hysterical, nor given to
fainting. simply wish hear your real, real opinion.”

“Upon what point?”

“In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville alive?”

Sherlock Holmes seemed be embarrassed by  question. “Frankly,
now!” she repeated, sting upon  rug  looking keenly down at
him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.

“Frankly, n, madam, do not.”

“You think that he dead?”

“do.”

“Murdered?”

“don’t say that. Perhaps.”

“ on what day did he meet hdeath?”

“On Monday.”

“n perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough explain how it is
that have received a letter from him to-day.”

Sherlock Holmes sprang out of hchair as if he had been galvanised.

“What!” he roared.

“Yes, to-day.” She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper in
 air.

“May see it?”

“Certainly.”

He snatched it from her in heagerness,  smoothing it out upon 
table he drew over  lamp  examined it intently. had left my
chair  was gazing at it over hshoulder.  envelope was a very
coarse one  was stamped with  Gravesend postmark  with 
date of that very day, or rar of  day before, for it was
considerably after midnight.

“Coarse writing,” murmured Holmes. “Surely thnot your husb’s
writing, madam.”

“No, but  enclosure is.”

“perceive also that whoever addressed  envelope had go 
inquire as  address.”

“How can you tell that?”

“ name, you see, in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself.
 rest of  greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper has
been used. If it had been written straight off,  n blotted, none
would be of a deep black shade. Thman has written  name, 
re has n been a pause before he wrote  address, which can only
mean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but
re nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see  letter.
Ha! re has been an enclosure here!”

“Yes, re was a ring. Hsignet-ring.”

“ you are sure that thyour husb’s h?”

“One of hhs.”

“One?”

“Hh when he wrote hurriedly. It very unlike husual writing,
 yet know it well.”

“‘Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. re a huge
error which it may take some little time rectify. Wait in
patience.—NEVILLE.’ Written in pencil upon  fly-leaf of a book,
octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man
with a dirty thumb. Ha!   flap has been gummed, if am not very
much in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco.  you have
no doubt that it your husb’s h, madam?”

“None. Neville wrote those words.”

“ y were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, 
clouds lighten, though should not venture say that  danger is
over.”

“But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes.”

“Unless tha clever forgery put us on  wrong scent. 
ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him.”

“No, no; it is, it hvery own writing!”

“Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday  only
posted to-day.”

“That possible.”

“If so, much may have happened between.”

“Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. know that all well
with him. re so keen a sympathy between us that should know if
evil came upon him. On  very day that saw him last he cut himself
in  bedroom,  yet in  dining-room rushed upstairs instantly
with  utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you think
that would respond such a trifle  yet be ignorant of his
death?”

“have seen too much not know that  impression of a woman may be
more valuable than  conclusion of an analytical reasoner.  in
thletter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to
corroborate your view. But if your husb alive  able write
letters, why should he remain away from you?”

“cannot imagine. It unthinkable.”

“ on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?”

“No.”

“ you were surprised see him in Swam Lane?”

“Very much so.”

“Was  window open?”

“Yes.”

“n he might have called you?”

“He might.”

“He only, as underst, gave an inarticulate cry?”

“Yes.”

“A call for help, you thought?”

“Yes. He waved hhs.”

“But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at 
unexpected sight of you might cause him throw up hhs?”

“It possible.”

“ you thought he was pulled back?”

“He disappeared so suddenly.”

“He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in  room?”

“No, but thhorrible man confessed having been re,  
Lascar was at  foot of  stairs.”

“Quite so. Your husb, as far as you could see, had hordinary
clos on?”

“But without hcollar or tie. distinctly saw hbare throat.”

“Had he ever spoken of Swam Lane?”

“Never.”

“Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?”

“Never.”

“Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are  principal points about which
wished be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper 
n retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow.”

A large  comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our
disposal,  was quickly between  sheets, for was weary after
my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, when he
had an unsolved problem upon hmind, would go for days,  even for
a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging hfacts, looking
at it from every point of view until he had eir fathomed it or
convinced himself that hdata were insufficient. It was soon evident
me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off
hcoat  waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown,  n
wered about  room collecting pillows from hbed  cushions
from  sofa  armchairs. With se he constructed a sort of
Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with an
ounce of shag tobacco  a box of matches laid out in front of him. In
 dim light of  lamp saw him sitting re, an old briar pipe
between hlips, heyes fixed vacantly upon  corner of 
ceiling,  blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, with
 light shining upon hstrong-set aquiline features. So he sat as I
dropped off sleep,  so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me
wake up,  found  summer sun shining in apartment. 
pipe was still between hlips,  smoke still curled upward,  
room was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of  heap
of shag which had seen upon  previous night.

“Awake, Watson?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“Game for a morning drive?”

“Certainly.”

“n dress. No one stirring yet, but know where  stable-boy
sleeps,  we shall soon have  trap out.” He chuckled himself as
he spoke, heyes twinkled,  he seemed a different man 
sombre thinker of  previous night.

As dressed glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was
stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. had hardly finished
when Holmes returned with  news that  boy was putting in 
horse.

“want test a little ory of mine,” said he, pulling on his
boots. “think, Watson, that you are now sting in  presence of
one of  most absolute fools in Europe. deserve be kicked from
here Charing Cross. But think have  key of  affair now.”

“ where it?” asked, smiling.

“In  bathroom,” he answered. “Oh, yes, am not joking,” he
continued, seeing my look of incredulity. “have just been re, 
have taken it out,  have got it in thGladstone bag. Come on,
my boy,  we shall see wher it will not fit  lock.”

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible,  out in
bright morning sunshine. In  road stood our horse  trap, with 
half-clad stable-boy waiting at  head. We both sprang in,  away
we dashed down  London Road. A few country carts were stirring,
bearing in vegetables  metropolis, but  lines of villas on
eir side were as silent  lifeless as some city in a dream.

“It has been in some points a singular case,” said Holmes, flicking 
horse on ina gallop. “confess that have been as blind as a mole,
but it better learn wisdom late than never learn it at all.”

In town  earliest risers were just beginning look sleepily from
ir windows as we drove through  streets of  Surrey side.
Passing down  Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over  river, 
dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply  right  found
ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known  force,
  two constables at  door saluted him. One of m held 
horse’s head while  or led us in.

“Who on duty?” asked Holmes.

“Inspector Bradstreet, sir.”

“Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?” A tall, stout official had come down 
stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap  frogged jacket. “wish to
have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet.”

“Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step inmy room here.”

It was a small, office-like room, with a huge ledger upon  table,
 a telephone projecting from  wall.  inspector sat down at his
desk.

“What can do for you, Mr. Holmes?”

“called about that beggarman, Boone— one who was charged with
being concerned in  disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.”

“Yes. He was brought up  remed for furr inquiries.”

“So heard. You have him here?”

“In  cells.”

“he quiet?”

“Oh, he gives no trouble. But he a dirty scoundrel.”

“Dirty?”

“Yes, it all we can do make him wash hhs,  hface is
as black as a tinker’s. Well, when once hcase has been settled, he
will have a regular prison bath;  think, if you saw him, you would
agree with me that he needed it.”

“should like see him very much.”

“Would you? That easily done. Come thway. You can leave your
bag.”

“No, think that I’ll take it.”

“Very good. Come thway, if you please.” He led us down a passage,
opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair,  brought us a
whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.

“ third on  right his,” said  inspector. “Here it is!” He
quietly shot back a panel in  upper part of  door  glanced
through.

“He asleep,” said he. “You can see him very well.”

We both put our eyes  grating.  prisoner lay with hface
towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly  heavily. He was
a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became hcalling, with a
coloured shirt protruding through  rent in htattered coat. He
was, as  inspector had said, extremely dirty, but  grime which
covered hface could not conceal its repulsive ugliness. A broad
wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye chin,  by its
contraction had turned up one side of  upper lip, so that three
teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red
hair grew low over heyes  forehead.

“He’s a beauty, isn’t he?” said  inspector.

“He certainly needs a wash,” remarked Holmes. “had an idea that he
might,  took  liberty of bringing  tools with me.” He opened
 Gladstone bag as he spoke,  took out, my astonishment, a very
large bath-sponge.

“He! he! You are a funny one,” chuckled  inspector.

“Now, if you will have  great goodness open that door very
quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure.”

“Well, don’t know why not,” said  inspector. “He doesn’t look a
credit  Bow Street cells, does he?” He slipped hkey in
lock,  we all very quietly entered  cell.  sleeper half
turned,  n settled down once more ina deep slumber. Holmes
stooped  water-jug, moistened hsponge,  n rubbed it
twice vigorously across  down  prisoner’s face.

“Let me introduce you,” he shouted, “Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee,
in  county of Kent.”

Never in my life have seen such a sight.  man’s face peeled off
under  sponge like  bark from a tree. Gone was  coarse brown
tint! Gone, too, was  horrid scar which had seamed it across, 
 twisted lip which had given  repulsive sneer  face! A
twitch brought away  tangled red hair,  re, sitting up in his
bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired 
smooth-skinned, rubbing heyes  staring about him with sleepy
bewilderment. n suddenly realising  exposure, he broke ina
scream  threw himself down with hface  pillow.

“Great heavens!” cried  inspector, “it is, indeed,  missing man.
know him from  photograph.”

 prisoner turned with  reckless air of a man who abons himself
hdestiny. “Be it so,” said he. “ pray what am charged with?”

“With making away with Mr. Neville St.— Oh, come, you can’t be charged
with that unless y make a case of attempted suicide of it,” said 
inspector with a grin. “Well, have been twenty-seven years in 
force, but threally takes  cake.”

“If am Mr. Neville St. Clair, n it obvious that no crime has
been committed,  that, refore, am illegally detained.”

“No crime, but a very great error has been committed,” said Holmes.
“You would have done better have trusted your wife.”

“It was not  wife; it was  children,” groaned  prisoner. “God
help me, would not have m ashamed of ir far. My God! What an
exposure! What can do?”

Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on  couch  patted him kindly
on  shoulder.

“If you leave it a court of law clear  matter up,” said he,
“of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On  or h, if you
convince  police authorities that re no possible case against
you, do not know that re any reason that  details should
find ir way in papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, am sure,
make notes upon anything which you might tell us  submit it 
proper authorities.  case would n never go incourt at all.”

“God bless you!” cried  prisoner passionately. “would have endured
imprisonment, ay, even execution, rar than have left my miserable
secret as a family blot my children.

“You are  first who have ever heard my story. My far was a
schoolmaster in Chesterfield, where received an excellent education.
travelled in my youth, took  stage,  finally became a
reporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editor wished to
have a series of articles upon begging in  metropolis,  I
volunteered supply m. re was  point from which all my
adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateur that I
could get  facts upon which base my articles. When an actor I
had, of course, learned all  secrets of making up,  had been
famous in  green-room for my skill. took advantage now of my
attainments. painted my face,  make myself as pitiable as
possible made a good scar  fixed one side of my lip in a twist by
 aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. n with a red head
of hair,  an appropriate dress, took my station in  business
part of  city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as a beggar.
For seven hours plied my trade,  when returned home in 
evening found my surprise that had received no less than 26_s_.
4_d_.

“wrote my articles  thought little more of  matter until, some
time later, backed a bill for a friend  had a writ served upon me
for £ 25. was at my wit’s end where get  money, but a sudden
idea came me. begged a fortnight’s grace from  creditor, asked
for a holiday from my employers,  spent  time in begging in 
City under my disguise. In ten days had  money  had paid 
debt.

“Well, you can imagine how hard it was settle down arduous work
at £ 2 a week when knew that could earn as much in a day by
smearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on  ground, 
sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride   money, but
 dollars won at last,  threw up reporting  sat day after day
in  corner which had first chosen, inspiring pity by my ghastly
face  filling my pockets with coppers. Only one man knew my secret.
He was  keeper of a low den in which used lodge in Swam
Lane, where could every morning emerge as a squalid beggar  in 
evenings transform myself ina well-dressed man about town. This
fellow, a Lascar, was well paid by me for hrooms, so that knew
that my secret was safe in hpossession.

“Well, very soon found that was saving considerable sums of money.
do not mean that any beggar in  streets of London could earn £ 700
a year—which less than my average takings—but had exceptional
advantages in my power of making up,  also in a facility of
repartee, which improved by practice  made me quite a recognised
character in  City. All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver,
poured in upon me,  it was a very bad day in which failed take
£ 2.

“As grew richer grew more ambitious, took a house in  country,
 eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as my real
occupation. My dear wife knew that had business in  City. She
little knew what.

“Last Monday had finished for  day  was dressing in my room
above  opium den when looked out of my window  saw, my
horror  astonishment, that my wife was sting in  street, with
her eyes fixed full upon me. gave a cry of surprise, threw up my arms
cover my face, , rushing my confidant,  Lascar, entreated
him prevent anyone from coming up me. heard her voice
downstairs, but knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly threw off
my clos, pulled on those of a beggar,  put on my pigments 
wig. Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise. But
n it occurred me that re might be a search in  room, 
that  clos might betray me. threw open  window, reopening by
my violence a small cut which had inflicted upon myself in 
bedroom that morning. n seized my coat, which was weighted by 
coppers which had just transferred it from  lear bag in
which carried my takings. hurled it out of  window,  it
disappeared in Thames.  or clos would have followed, but
at that moment re was a rush of constables up  stair,  a few
minutes after found, rar, confess, my relief, that instead of
being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, was arrested as his
murderer.

“do not know that re anything else for me explain. was
determined preserve my disguise as long as possible,  hence my
preference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terribly
anxious, slipped off my ring  confided it  Lascar at a
moment when no constable was watching me, toger with a hurried
scrawl, telling her that she had no cause fear.”

“That note only reached her yesterday,” said Holmes.

“Good God! What a week she must have spent!”

“ police have watched thLascar,” said Inspector Bradstreet, “
can quite underst that he might find it difficult post a letter
unobserved. Probably he hed it some sailor customer of his, who
forgot all about it for some days.”

“That was it,” said Holmes, nodding approvingly; “have no doubt of
it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?”

“Many times; but what was a fine me?”

“It must stop here, however,” said Bradstreet. “If  police are to
hush ththing up, re must be no more of Hugh Boone.”

“have sworn it by  most solemn oaths which a man can take.”

“In that case think that it probable that no furr steps may be
taken. But if you are found again, n all must come out. am sure,
Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted you for having cleared
 matter up. wish knew how you reach your results.”

“reached thone,” said my friend, “by sitting upon five pillows 
consuming an ounce of shag. think, Watson, that if we drive Baker
Street we shall just be in time for breakfast.”



VII.  ADVENTURE OF  BLUE CARBUNCLE

had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon  second morning
after Christmas, with  intention of wishing him  compliments of
 season. He was lounging upon  sofa in a purple dressing-gown, a
pipe-rack within hreach upon  right,  a pile of crumpled
morning papers, evidently newly studied, near at h. Beside  couch
was a wooden chair,  on  angle of  back hung a very seedy 
disreputable hard-felt hat, much  worse for wear,  cracked in
several places. A lens  a forceps lying upon  seat of  chair
suggested that  hat had been suspended in thmanner for 
purpose of examination.

“You are engaged,” said I; “perhaps interrupt you.”

“Not at all. am glad have a friend with whom can discuss my
results.  matter a perfectly trivial one”—he jerked hthumb in
 direction of  old hat—“but re are points in connection with
it which are not entirely devoid of interest  even of instruction.”

seated myself in harmchair  warmed my hs before his
crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in,   windows were
thick with  ice crystals. “suppose,” remarked, “that, homely as
it looks, ththing has some deadly story linked on it—that it is
 clue which will guide you in  solution of some mystery  
punishment of some crime.”

“No, no. No crime,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “Only one of those
whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have four million
human beings all jostling each or within  space of a few square
miles. Amid  action  reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity,
every possible combination of events may be expected take place, 
many a little problem will be presented which may be striking 
bizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience of
such.”

“So much so,” remarked, “that of  last six cases which have
added my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime.”

“Precisely. You allude my attempt recover  Irene Adler papers,
 singular case of Miss Mary Surl,   adventure of
 man with  twisted lip. Well, have no doubt that thsmall
matter will fall in same innocent category. You know Peterson,
 commissionaire?”

“Yes.”

“It him that thtrophy belongs.”

“It hhat.”

“No, no, he found it. Its owner unknown. beg that you will look
upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem.
, first, as how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning,
in company with a good fat goose, which is, have no doubt, roasting
at thmoment in front of Peterson’s fire.  facts are se: about
four o’clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, a
very honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification  was
making hway homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he
saw, in  gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, 
carrying a white goose slung over hshoulder. As he reached 
corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between thstranger  a
little knot of roughs. One of  latter knocked off  man’s hat, on
which he raised hstick defend himself , swinging it over his
head, smashed  shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forward
protect  stranger from hassailants; but  man, shocked at
having broken  window,  seeing an official-looking person in
uniform rushing towards him, dropped hgoose, took hheels, 
vanished amid  labyrinth of small streets which lie at  back of
Tottenham Court Road.  roughs had also fled at  appearance of
Peterson, so that he was left in possession of  field of battle, 
also of  spoils of victory in  shape of thbattered hat  a
most unimpeachable Christmas goose.”

“Which surely he restored ir owner?”

“My dear fellow, re lies  problem. It true that ‘For Mrs.
Henry Baker’ was printed upon a small card which was tied  bird’s
left leg,  it also true that  initials ‘H. B.’ are legible
upon  lining of thhat, but as re are some thouss of Bakers,
 some hundreds of Henry Bakers in thcity of ours, it not easy
restore lost property any one of m.”

“What, n, did Peterson do?”

“He brought round both hat  goose me on Christmas morning,
knowing that even  smallest problems are of interest me. 
goose we retained until thmorning, when re were signs that, in
spite of  slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten
without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, refore, to
fulfil  ultimate destiny of a goose, while continue retain 
hat of  unknown gentleman who lost hChristmas dinner.”

“Did he not advertise?”

“No.”

“n, what clue could you have as hidentity?”

“Only as much as we can deduce.”

“From hhat?”

“Precisely.”

“But you are joking. What can you gar from thold battered felt?”

“Here my lens. You know my methods. What can you gar yourself as
 individuality of  man who has worn tharticle?”

took  tattered object in my hs  turned it over rar
ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of  usual round shape,
hard  much  worse for wear.  lining had been of red silk, but
was a good deal discoloured. re was no maker’s name; but, as Holmes
had remarked,  initials “H. B.” were scrawled upon one side. It was
pierced in  brim for a hat-securer, but  elastic was missing. For
 rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty,  spotted in several
places, although re seemed have been some attempt hide 
discoloured patches by smearing m with ink.

“can see nothing,” said I, hing it back my friend.

“On  contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, to
reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your
inferences.”

“n, pray tell me what it that you can infer from thhat?”

He picked it up  gazed at it in  peculiar introspective fashion
which was characteristic of him. “It perhaps less suggestive than it
might have been,” he remarked, “ yet re are a few inferences
which are very distinct,  a few ors which represent at least a
strong balance of probability. That  man was highly intellectual is
of course obvious upon  face of it,  also that he was fairly
well-to-do within  last three years, although he has now fallen upon
evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing
a moral retrogression, which, when taken with  decline of his
fortunes, seems indicate some evil influence, probably drink, at
work upon him. Thmay account also for  obvious fact that hwife
has ceased love him.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect,” he continued,
disregarding my remonstrance. “He a man who leads a sedentary life,
goes out little, out of training entirely, middle-aged, has
grizzled hair which he has had cut within  last few days,  which
he anoints with lime-cream. se are  more patent facts which are
be deduced from hhat. Also, by  way, that it extremely
improbable that he has gas laid on in hhouse.”

“You are certainly joking, Holmes.”

“Not in  least. it possible that even now, when give you se
results, you are unable see how y are attained?”

“have no doubt that am very stupid, but must confess that am
unable follow you. For example, how did you deduce that thman was
intellectual?”

For answer Holmes clapped  hat upon hhead. It came right over 
forehead  settled upon  bridge of hnose. “It a question of
cubic capacity,” said he; “a man with so large a brain must have
something in it.”

“ decline of hfortunes, n?”

“Thhat three years old. se flat brims curled at  edge came
in n. It a hat of  very best quality. Look at  b of
ribbed silk   excellent lining. If thman could afford buy
so expensive a hat three years ago,  has had no hat since, n he
has assuredly gone down in  world.”

“Well, that clear enough, certainly. But how about  foresight 
 moral retrogression?”

Sherlock Holmes laughed. “Here  foresight,” said he putting his
finger upon  little disc  loop of  hat-securer. “y are
never sold upon hats. If thman ordered one, it a sign of a
certain amount of foresight, since he went out of hway take this
precaution against  wind. But since we see that he has broken 
elastic  has not troubled replace it, it obvious that he has
less foresight now than formerly, which a distinct proof of a
weakening nature. On  or h, he has endeavoured conceal some
of se stains upon  felt by daubing m with ink, which a sign
that he has not entirely lost hself-respect.”

“Your reasoning certainly plausible.”

“ furr points, that he middle-aged, that hhair grizzled,
that it has been recently cut,  that he uses lime-cream, are all to
be gared from a close examination of  lower part of  lining.
 lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by 
scissors of  barber. y all appear be adhesive,  re a
distinct odour of lime-cream. Thdust, you will observe, not 
gritty, grey dust of  street but  fluffy brown dust of  house,
showing that it has been hung up indoors most of  time, while 
marks of moisture upon  inside are proof positive that  wearer
perspired very freely,  could refore, hardly be in  best of
training.”

“But hwife—you said that she had ceased love him.”

“Thhat has not been brushed for weeks. When see you, my dear
Watson, with a week’s accumulation of dust upon your hat,  when your
wife allows you go out in such a state, shall fear that you also
have been unfortunate enough lose your wife’s affection.”

“But he might be a bachelor.”

“Nay, he was bringing home  goose as a peace-offering hwife.
Remember  card upon  bird’s leg.”

“You have an answer everything. But how on earth do you deduce that
 gas not laid on in hhouse?”

“One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when see no
less than five, think that re can be little doubt that 
individual must be brought infrequent contact with burning
tallow—walks upstairs at night probably with hhat in one h  a
guttering cle in  or. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains from
a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?”

“Well, it very ingenious,” said I, laughing; “but since, as you said
just now, re has been no crime committed,  no harm done save 
loss of a goose, all thseems be rar a waste of energy.”

Sherlock Holmes had opened hmouth reply, when  door flew open,
 Peterson,  commissionaire, rushed in apartment with
flushed cheeks   face of a man who dazed with astonishment.

“ goose, Mr. Holmes!  goose, sir!” he gasped.

“Eh? What of it, n? Has it returned life  flapped off through
 kitchen window?” Holmes twisted himself round upon  sofa get
a fairer view of  man’s excited face.

“See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!” He held out his
h  displayed upon  centre of  palm a brilliantly
scintillating blue stone, rar smaller than a bean in size, but of
such purity  radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in 
dark hollow of hh.

Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. “By Jove, Peterson!” said he,
“thtreasure trove indeed. suppose you know what you have got?”

“A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts inglass as though it were
putty.”

“It’s more than a precious stone. It __ precious stone.”

“Not  Countess of Morcar’s blue carbuncle!” ejaculated.

“Precisely so. ought know its size  shape, seeing that have
read  advertisement about it in _ Times_ every day lately. It is
absolutely unique,  its value can only be conjectured, but 
reward offered of £ 1000 certainly not within a twentieth part of
 market price.”

“A thous pounds! Great Lord of mercy!”  commissionaire plumped
down ina chair  stared from one  or of us.

“That  reward,  have reason know that re are
sentimental considerations in  background which would induce 
Countess part with half her fortune if she could but recover 
gem.”

“It was lost, if remember aright, at  Hotel Cosmopolitan,” I
remarked.

“Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a
plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from  lady’s
jewel-case.  evidence against him was so strong that  case has
been referred  Assizes. have some account of  matter here, I
believe.” He rummaged amid hnewspapers, glancing over  dates,
until at last he smood one out, doubled it over,  read 
following paragraph:

“Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was
brought up upon  charge of having upon  22nd inst., abstracted
from  jewel-case of  Countess of Morcar  valuable gem known as
 blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at  hotel, gave his
evidence  effect that he had shown Horner up  dressing-room
of  Countess of Morcar upon  day of  robbery in order that he
might solder  second bar of  grate, which was loose. He had
remained with Horner some little time, but had finally been called
away. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared, that 
bureau had been forced open,  that  small morocco casket in
which, as it afterwards transpired,  Countess was accustomed keep
her jewel, was lying empty upon  dressing-table. Ryder instantly
gave  alarm,  Horner was arrested  same evening; but  stone
could not be found eir upon hperson or in hrooms. Carine
Cusack, maid  Countess, deposed having heard Ryder’s cry of
dismay on discovering  robbery,  having rushed in room,
where she found matters as described by  last witness. Inspector
Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as  arrest of Horner, who
struggled frantically,  protested hinnocence in  strongest
terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been given
against  prisoner,  magistrate refused deal summarily with 
offence, but referred it  Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs of
intense emotion during  proceedings, fainted away at  conclusion
 was carried out of court.”

“Hum! So much for  police-court,” said Holmes thoughtfully, tossing
aside  paper. “ question for us now solve  sequence of
events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end  crop of a
goose in Tottenham Court Road at  or. You see, Watson, our little
deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important  less
innocent aspect. Here  stone;  stone came from  goose, 
 goose came from Mr. Henry Baker,  gentleman with  bad hat 
all  or characteristics with which have bored you. So now we
must set ourselves very seriously finding thgentleman 
ascertaining what part he has played in thlittle mystery. do
this, we must try  simplest means first,  se lie undoubtedly
in an advertisement in all  evening papers. If thfail, shall
have recourse or methods.”

“What will you say?”

“Give me a pencil  that slip of paper. Now, n: ‘Found at 
corner of Goodge Street, a goose  a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Baker
can have  same by applying at 6:30 thevening at 221B, Baker
Street.’ That clear  concise.”

“Very. But will he see it?”

“Well, he sure keep an eye on  papers, since, a poor man,
 loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by hmischance in
breaking  window  by  approach of Peterson that he thought of
nothing but flight, but since n he must have bitterly regretted 
impulse which caused him drop hbird. n, again, 
introduction of hname will cause him see it, for everyone who
knows him will direct hattention it. Here you are, Peterson, run
down  advertising agency  have thput in  evening
papers.”

“In which, sir?”

“Oh, in  _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St. James’s Gazette_,
_Evening News_, _Stard_, _Echo_,  any ors that occur you.”

“Very well, sir.  thstone?”

“Ah, yes, shall keep  stone. Thank you. , say, Peterson, just
buy a goose on your way back  leave it here with me, for we must
have one give thgentleman in place of  one which your
family now devouring.”

When  commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up  stone  held it
against  light. “It’s a bonny thing,” said he. “Just see how it
glints  sparkles. Of course it a nucleus  focus of crime.
Every good stone is. y are  devil’s pet baits. In  larger 
older jewels every facet may st for a bloody deed. Thstone not
yet twenty years old. It was found in  banks of  Amoy River in
sourn China  remarkable in having every characteristic of 
carbuncle, save that it blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spite
of its youth, it has already a sinister history. re have been two
murders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide,  several robberies brought
about for  sake of thforty-grain weight of crystallised charcoal.
Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor  gallows
  prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now  drop a line to
 Countess say that we have it.”

“Do you think that thman Horner innocent?”

“cannot tell.”

“Well, n, do you imagine that thor one, Henry Baker, had
anything do with  matter?”

“It is, think, much more likely that Henry Baker an absolutely
innocent man, who had no idea that  bird which he was carrying was
of considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,
however, shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answer
our advertisement.”

“ you can do nothing until n?”

“Nothing.”

“In that case shall continue my professional round. But shall come
back in  evening at  hour you have mentioned, for should like
see  solution of so tangled a business.”

“Very glad see you. dine at seven. re a woodcock, believe.
By  way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps ought ask Mrs.
Hudson examine its crop.”

had been delayed at a case,  it was a little after half-past six
when found myself in Baker Street once more. As approached 
house saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was
buttoned up hchin waiting outside in  bright semicircle which
was thrown from  fanlight. Just as arrived  door was opened,
 we were shown up toger Holmes’ room.

“Mr. Henry Baker, believe,” said he, rising from harmchair 
greeting hvisitor with  easy air of geniality which he could so
readily assume. “Pray take thchair by  fire, Mr. Baker. It a
cold night,  observe that your circulation more adapted for
summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at  right
time. that your hat, Mr. Baker?”

“Yes, sir, that undoubtedly my hat.”

He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head,  a broad,
intelligent face, sloping down a pointed beard of grizzled brown. A
touch of red in nose  cheeks, with a slight tremor of hextended
h, recalled Holmes’ surmise as hhabits. Hrusty black
frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with  collar turned up,
 hlank wrists protruded from hsleeves without a sign of cuff
or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccafashion, choosing hwords with
care,  gave  impression generally of a man of learning 
letters who had had ill-usage at  hs of fortune.

“We have retained se things for some days,” said Holmes, “because we
expected see an advertisement from you giving your address. am at
a loss know now why you did not advertise.”

Our visitor gave a rar shamefaced laugh. “Shillings have not been so
plentiful with me as y once were,” he remarked. “had no doubt that
 gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat  
bird. did not care spend more money in a hopeless attempt at
recovering m.”

“Very naturally. By  way, about  bird, we were compelled eat
it.”

“eat it!” Our visitor half rose from hchair in hexcitement.

“Yes, it would have been of no use anyone had we not done so. But I
presume that thor goose upon  sideboard, which about 
same weight  perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally
well?”

“Oh, certainly, certainly,” answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.

“Of course, we still have  fears, legs, crop,  so on of your
own bird, so if you wish—”

 man burst ina hearty laugh. “y might be useful me as
relics of my adventure,” said he, “but beyond that can hardly see
what use  _disjecta membra_ of my late acquaintance are going be
me. No, sir, think that, with your permission, will confine my
attentions  excellent bird which perceive upon  sideboard.”

Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his
shoulders.

“re your hat, n,  re your bird,” said he. “By  way,
would it bore you tell me where you got  or one from? am
somewhat of a fowl fancier,  have seldom seen a better grown
goose.”

“Certainly, sir,” said Baker, who had risen  tucked hnewly gained
property under harm. “re are a few of us who frequent  Alpha
Inn, near  Museum—we are be found in  Museum itself during 
day, you underst. Thyear our good host, Windigate by name,
instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few pence
every week, we were each receive a bird at Christmas. My pence were
duly paid,   rest familiar you. am much indebted you,
sir, for a Scotch bonnet fitted neir my years nor my gravity.”
With a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly both of us 
strode off upon hway.

“So much for Mr. Henry Baker,” said Holmes when he had closed  door
behind him. “It quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about
 matter. Are you hungry, Watson?”

“Not particularly.”

“n suggest that we turn our dinner ina supper  follow up
thclue while it still hot.”

“By all means.”

It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters  wrapped cravats
about our throats. Outside,  stars were shining coldly in a
cloudless sky,   breath of  passers-by blew out insmoke
like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply  loudly as
we swung through  doctors’ quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street,
 so through Wigmore Street inOxford Street. In a quarter of an
hour we were in Bloomsbury at  Alpha Inn, which a small
public-house at  corner of one of  streets which runs down into
Holborn. Holmes pushed open  door of  private bar  ordered two
glasses of beer from  ruddy-faced, white-aproned llord.

“Your beer should be excellent if it as good as your geese,” said
he.

“My geese!”  man seemed surprised.

“Yes. was speaking only half an hour ago Mr. Henry Baker, who was
a member of your goose club.”

“Ah! yes, see. But you see, sir, m’s not _our_ geese.”

“Indeed! Whose, n?”

“Well, got  two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden.”

“Indeed? know some of m. Which was it?”

“Breckinridge hname.”

“Ah! don’t know him. Well, here’s your good health llord, 
prosperity your house. Good-night.”

“Now for Mr. Breckinridge,” he continued, buttoning up hcoat as we
came out in frosty air. “Remember, Watson that though we have so
homely a thing as a goose at one end of thchain, we have at 
or a man who will certainly get seven years’ penal servitude unless
we can establish hinnocence. It possible that our inquiry may but
confirm hguilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation
which has been missed by  police,  which a singular chance has
placed in our hs. Let us follow it out  bitter end. Faces to
 south, n,  quick march!”

We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street,  so through a zigzag
of slums Covent Garden Market. One of  largest stalls bore 
name of Breckinridge upon it,   proprietor a horsey-looking man,
with a sharp face  trim side-whiskers was helping a boy put up
 shutters.

“Good-evening. It’s a cold night,” said Holmes.

 salesman nodded  shot a questioning glance at my companion.

“Sold out of geese, see,” continued Holmes, pointing at  bare
slabs of marble.

“Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning.”

“That’s no good.”

“Well, re are some on  stall with  gas-flare.”

“Ah, but was recommended you.”

“Who by?”

“ llord of  Alpha.”

“Oh, yes; sent him a couple of dozen.”

“Fine birds y were, too. Now where did you get m from?”

my surprise  question provoked a burst of anger from 
salesman.

“Now, n, mister,” said he, with hhead cocked  harms akimbo,
“what are you driving at? Let’s have it straight, now.”

“It straight enough. should like know who sold you  geese
which you supplied  Alpha.”

“Well n, shan’t tell you. So now!”

“Oh, it a matter of no importance; but don’t know why you should
be so warm over such a trifle.”

“Warm! You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as am. When I
pay good money for a good article re should be an end of 
business; but it’s ‘Where are  geese?’  ‘Who did you sell 
geese to?’  ‘What will you take for  geese?’ One would think y
were  only geese in  world, hear  fuss that made over
m.”

“Well, have no connection with any or people who have been making
inquiries,” said Holmes carelessly. “If you won’t tell us  bet is
off, that all. But I’m always ready back my opinion on a matter
of fowls,  have a fiver on it that  bird ate country
bred.”

“Well, n, you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred,” snapped 
salesman.

“It’s nothing of  kind.”

“say it is.”

“don’t believe it.”

“D’you think you know more about fowls than I, who have hled m
ever since was a nipper? tell you, all those birds that went 
Alpha were town bred.”

“You’ll never persuade me believe that.”

“Will you bet, n?”

“It’s merely taking your money, for know that am right. But I’ll
have a sovereign on with you, just teach you not be obstinate.”

 salesman chuckled grimly. “Bring me  books, Bill,” said he.

 small boy brought round a small thin volume  a great
greasy-backed one, laying m out toger beneath  hanging lamp.

“Now n, Mr. Cocksure,” said  salesman, “thought that was out
of geese, but before finish you’ll find that re still one left
in my shop. You see thlittle book?”

“Well?”

“That’s  list of  folk from whom buy. D’you see? Well, n,
here on thpage are  country folk,   numbers after ir
names are where ir accounts are in  big ledger. Now, n! You
see thor page in red ink? Well, that a list of my town
suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out me.”

“Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road—249,” read Holmes.

“Quite so. Now turn that up in  ledger.”

Holmes turned  page indicated. “Here you are, ‘Mrs. Oakshott,
117, Brixton Road, egg  poultry supplier.’”

“Now, n, what’s  last entry?”

“‘December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7_s_. 6_d_.’”

“Quite so. re you are.  underneath?”

“‘Sold Mr. Windigate of  Alpha, at 12_s_.’”

“What have you say now?”

Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his
pocket  threw it down upon  slab, turning away with  air of a
man whose disgust too deep for words. A few yards off he stopped
under a lamp-post  laughed in  hearty, noiseless fashion which
was peculiar him.

“When you see a man with whiskers of that cut   ‘Pink ’un’
protruding out of hpocket, you can always draw him by a bet,” said
he. “daresay that if had put £ 100 down in front of him, that man
would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from him
by  idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, I
fancy, nearing  end of our quest,   only point which remains
be determined wher we should go on thMrs. Oakshott
to-night, or wher we should reserve it for to-morrow. It clear
from what that surly fellow said that re are ors besides
ourselves who are anxious about  matter,  should—”

Hremarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out
from  stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little
rat-faced fellow sting in  centre of  circle of yellow light
which was thrown by  swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, 
salesman, framed in  door of hstall, was shaking hfists
fiercely at  cringing figure.

“I’ve had enough of you  your geese,” he shouted. “wish you were
all at  devil toger. If you come pestering me any more with your
silly talk I’ll set  dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here 
I’ll answer her, but what have you do with it? Did buy  geese
off you?”

“No; but one of m was mine all  same,” whined  little man.

“Well, n, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it.”

“She told me ask you.”

“Well, you can ask  King of Proosia, for all care. I’ve had enough
of it. Get out of this!” He rushed fiercely forward,   inquirer
flitted away in darkness.

“Ha! thmay save us a visit Brixton Road,” whispered Holmes. “Come
with me,  we will see what be made of thfellow.” Striding
through  scattered knots of people who lounged round  flaring
stalls, my companion speedily overtook  little man  touched him
upon  shoulder. He sprang round,  could see in  gas-light
that every vestige of colour had been driven from hface.

“Who are you, n? What do you want?” he asked in a quavering voice.

“You will excuse me,” said Holmes blly, “but could not help
overhearing  questions which you put  salesman just now. I
think that could be of assistance you.”

“You? Who are you? How could you know anything of  matter?”

“My name Sherlock Holmes. It my business know what or
people don’t know.”

“But you can know nothing of this?”

“Excuse me, know everything of it. You are endeavouring trace some
geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, a salesman
named Breckinridge, by him in turn Mr. Windigate, of  Alpha, 
by him hclub, of which Mr. Henry Baker a member.”

“Oh, sir, you are  very man whom have longed meet,” cried 
little fellow with outstretched hs  quivering fingers. “can
hardly explain you how interested am in thmatter.”

Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. “In that case
we had better discuss it in a cosy room rar than in thwind-swept
market-place,” said he. “But pray tell me, before we go farr, who it
that have  pleasure of assisting.”

 man hesitated for an instant. “My name John Robinson,” he
answered with a sidelong glance.

“No, no;  real name,” said Holmes sweetly. “It always awkward
doing business with an alias.”

A flush sprang  white cheeks of  stranger. “Well n,” said
he, “my real name James Ryder.”

“Precisely so. Head attendant at  Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step into
 cab,  shall soon be able tell you everything which you
would wish know.”

 little man stood glancing from one  or of us with
half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who not sure wher he
on  verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. n he stepped into
 cab,  in half an hour we were back in  sitting-room at Baker
Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but  high, thin
breathing of our new companion,   claspings  unclaspings of
hhs, spoke of  nervous tension within him.

“Here we are!” said Holmes cheerily as we filed in room. “
fire looks very seasonable in thwear. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.
Pray take  basket-chair. will just put on my slippers before we
settle thlittle matter of yours. Now, n! You want know what
became of those geese?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Or rar, fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, imagine in which
you were interested—white, with a black bar across  tail.”

Ryder quivered with emotion. “Oh, sir,” he cried, “can you tell me
where it went to?”

“It came here.”

“Here?”

“Yes,  a most remarkable bird it proved. don’t wonder that you
should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead—
bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. have it here
in my museum.”

Our visitor staggered hfeet  clutched  mantelpiece with his
right h. Holmes unlocked hstrong-box  held up  blue
carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant,
many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertain
wher claim or disown it.

“ game’s up, Ryder,” said Holmes quietly. “Hold up, man, or you’ll
be in fire! Give him an arm back inhchair, Watson. He’s not
got blood enough go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of
bry. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is, to
be sure!”

For a moment he had staggered  nearly fallen, but  bry brought
a tinge of colour inhcheeks,  he sat staring with frightened
eyes at haccuser.

“have almost every link in my hs,  all  proofs which could
possibly need, so re little which you need tell me. Still, that
little may as well be cleared up make  case complete. You had
heard, Ryder, of thblue stone of  Countess of Morcar’s?”

“It was Carine Cusack who told me of it,” said he in a crackling
voice.

“see—her ladyship’s waiting-maid. Well,  temptation of sudden
wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been for
better men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in  means
you used. It seems me, Ryder, that re  making of a very
pretty villain in you. You knew that thman Horner,  plumber, had
been concerned in some such matter before,  that suspicion would
rest  more readily upon him. What did you do, n? You made some
small job in my lady’s room—you  your confederate Cusack— you
managed that he should be  man sent for. n, when he had left, you
rifled  jewel-case, raised  alarm,  had thunfortunate man
arrested. You n—”

Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon  rug  clutched at my
companion’s knees. “For God’s sake, have mercy!” he shrieked. “Think of
my far! Of my mor! It would break ir hearts. never went
wrong before! never will again. swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible.
Oh, don’t bring it incourt! For Christ’s sake, don’t!”

“Get back inyour chair!” said Holmes sternly. “It very well to
cringe  crawl now, but you thought little enough of thpoor Horner
in  dock for a crime of which he knew nothing.”

“will fly, Mr. Holmes. will leave  country, sir. n  charge
against him will break down.”

“Hum! We will talk about that.  now let us hear a true account of
 next act. How came  stone in goose,  how came  goose
in open market? Tell us  truth, for re lies your only hope
of safety.”

Ryder passed htongue over hparched lips. “will tell you it just
as it happened, sir,” said he. “When Horner had been arrested, it
seemed me that it would be best for me get away with  stone at
once, for did not know at what moment  police might not take it
inir heads search me  my room. re was no place about 
hotel where it would be safe. went out, as if on some commission, 
made for my sister’s house. She had married a man named Oakshott, 
lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for  market. All 
way re every man met seemed me be a policeman or a
detective; , for all that it was a cold night,  sweat was pouring
down my face before came  Brixton Road. My sister asked me what
was  matter,  why was so pale; but told her that had been
upset by  jewel robbery at  hotel. n went in back yard
 smoked a pipe  wondered what it would be best do.

“had a friend once called Maudsley, who went  bad,  has just
been serving htime in Pentonville. One day he had met me,  fell
intalk about  ways of thieves,  how y could get rid of what
y stole. knew that he would be true me, for knew one or two
things about him; so made up my mind go right on Kilburn, where
he lived,  take him inmy confidence. He would show me how turn
 stone inmoney. But how get him in safety? thought of 
agonies had gone through in coming from  hotel. might at any
moment be seized  searched,  re would be  stone in my
waistcoat pocket. was leaning against  wall at  time 
looking at  geese which were waddling about round my feet, 
suddenly an idea came inmy head which showed me how could beat 
best detective that ever lived.

“My sister had told me some weeks before that might have  pick of
her geese for a Christmas present,  knew that she was always as
good as her word. would take my goose now,  in it would carry my
stone Kilburn. re was a little shed in  yard,  behind this
drove one of  birds—a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I
caught it,  prying its bill open, thrust  stone down its throat
as far as my finger could reach.  bird gave a gulp,  felt 
stone pass along its gullet  down inits crop. But  creature
flapped  struggled,  out came my sister know what was 
matter. As turned speak her  brute broke loose  fluttered
off among  ors.

“‘Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?’ says she.

“‘Well,’ said I, ‘you said you’d give me one for Christmas,  was
feeling which was  fattest.’

“‘Oh,’ says she, ‘we’ve set yours aside for you—Jem’s bird, we call it.
It’s  big white one over yonder. re’s twenty-six of m, which
makes one for you,  one for us,  two dozen for  market.’

“‘Thank you, Maggie,’ says I; ‘but if it all  same you, I’d
rar have that one was hling just now.’

“‘ or a good three pound heavier,’ said she, ‘ we fattened
it expressly for you.’

“‘Never mind. I’ll have  or,  I’ll take it now,’ said I.

“‘Oh, just as you like,’ said she, a little huffed. ‘Which it you
want, n?’

“‘That white one with  barred tail, right in  middle of 
flock.’

“‘Oh, very well. Kill it  take it with you.’

“Well, did what she said, Mr. Holmes,  carried  bird all 
way Kilburn. told my pal what had done, for he was a man that it
was easy tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked, 
we got a knife  opened  goose. My heart turned water, for
re was no sign of  stone,  knew that some terrible mistake
had occurred. left  bird, rushed back my sister’s,  hurried
in back yard. re was not a bird be seen re.

“‘Where are y all, Maggie?’ cried.

“‘Gone  dealer’s, Jem.’

“‘Which dealer’s?’

“‘Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.’

“‘But was re anor with a barred tail?’ asked, ‘ same as 
one chose?’

“‘Yes, Jem; re were two barred-tailed ones,  could never tell
m apart.’

“Well, n, of course saw it all,  ran off as hard as my feet
would carry me thman Breckinridge; but he had sold  lot at
once,  not one word would he tell me as where y had gone. You
heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me like
that. My sister thinks that am going mad. Sometimes think that am
myself.  now— now am myself a bred thief, without ever
having touched  wealth for which sold my character. God help me!
God help me!” He burst inconvulsive sobbing, with hface buried in
hhs.

re was a long silence, broken only by hheavy breathing  by 
measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes’ finger-tips upon  edge of 
table. n my friend rose  threw open  door.

“Get out!” said he.

“What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!”

“No more words. Get out!”

 no more words were needed. re was a rush, a clatter upon 
stairs,  bang of a door,   crisp rattle of running footfalls
from  street.

“After all, Watson,” said Holmes, reaching up hh for hclay
pipe, “am not retained by  police supply ir deficiencies. If
Horner were in danger it would be anor thing; but thfellow will
not appear against him,   case must collapse. suppose that am
commuting a felony, but it just possible that am saving a soul.
Thfellow will not go wrong again; he too terribly frightened.
Send him gaol now,  you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides,
it  season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a most
singular  whimsical problem,  its solution its own reward. If
you will have  goodness touch  bell, Doctor, we will begin
anor investigation, in which, also a bird will be  chief
feature.”



VIII.  ADVENTURE OF  SPECKLED B

On glancing over my notes of  seventy odd cases in which have
during  last eight years studied  methods of my friend Sherlock
Holmes, find many tragic, some comic, a large number merely strange,
but none commonplace; for, working as he did rar for  love of his
art than for  acquirement of wealth, he refused associate himself
with any investigation which did not tend towards  unusual,  even
 fantastic. Of all se varied cases, however, cannot recall any
which presented more singular features than that which was associated
with  well-known Surrey family of  Roylotts of Stoke Moran. 
events in question occurred in  early days of my association with
Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street. It is
possible that might have placed m upon record before, but a
promise of secrecy was made at  time, from which have only been
freed during  last month by  untimely death of  lady whom
 pledge was given. It perhaps as well that  facts should now
come light, for have reasons know that re are widespread
rumours as  death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend make 
matter even more terrible than  truth.

It was early in April in  year ’83 that woke one morning find
Sherlock Holmes sting, fully dressed, by  side of my bed. He was
a late riser, as a rule,  as  clock on  mantelpiece showed me
that it was only a quarter-past seven, blinked up at him in some
surprise,  perhaps just a little resentment, for was myself
regular in my habits.

“Very sorry knock you up, Watson,” said he, “but it’s  common lot
thmorning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me,
 on you.”

“What it, n—a fire?”

“No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerable
state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She waiting now in
 sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wer about  metropolat
thhour of  morning,  knock sleepy people up out of ir beds,
presume that it something very pressing which y have to
communicate. Should it prove be an interesting case, you would, am
sure, wish follow it from  outset. thought, at any rate, that I
should call you  give you  chance.”

“My dear fellow, would not miss it for anything.”

had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in hprofessional
investigations,  in admiring  rapid deductions, as swift as
intuitions,  yet always founded on a logical baswith which he
unravelled  problems which were submitted him. rapidly threw on
my clos  was ready in a few minutes accompany my friend down
 sitting-room. A lady dressed in black  heavily veiled, who
had been sitting in  window, rose as we entered.

“Good-morning, madam,” said Holmes cheerily. “My name Sherlock
Holmes. Thmy intimate friend  associate, Dr. Watson, before
whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! am glad see
that Mrs. Hudson has had  good sense light  fire. Pray draw up
it,  shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for observe that
you are shivering.”

“It not cold which makes me shiver,” said  woman in a low voice,
changing her seat as requested.

“What, n?”

“It fear, Mr. Holmes. It terror.” She raised her veil as she
spoke,  we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state of
agitation, her face all drawn  grey, with restless frightened eyes,
like those of some hunted animal. Her features  figure were those of
a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey,  her
expression was weary  haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one
of hquick, all-comprehensive glances.

“You must not fear,” said he soothingly, bending forward  patting
her forearm. “We shall soon set matters right, have no doubt. You
have come in by train thmorning, see.”

“You know me, n?”

“No, but observe  second half of a return ticket in  palm of
your left glove. You must have started early,  yet you had a good
drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached 
station.”

 lady gave a violent start  stared in bewilderment at my
companion.

“re no mystery, my dear madam,” said he, smiling. “ left arm
of your jacket spattered with mud in no less than seven places. 
marks are perfectly fresh. re no vehicle save a dog-cart which
throws up mud in that way,  n only when you sit on  left-h
side of  driver.”

“Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct,” said she. “I
started from home before six, reached Learhead at twenty past, 
came in by  first train Waterloo. Sir, can st thstrain no
longer; shall go mad if it continues. have no one turn to—none,
save only one, who cares for me,  he, poor fellow, can be of little
aid. have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; have heard of you from Mrs.
Farintosh, whom you helped in  hour of her sore need. It was from
her that had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could
help me, too,  at least throw a little light through  dense
darkness which surrounds me? At present it out of my power reward
you for your services, but in a month or six weeks shall be married,
with  control of my own income,  n at least you shall not find
me ungrateful.”

Holmes turned hdesk , unlocking it, drew out a small
case-book, which he consulted.

“Farintosh,” said he. “Ah yes, recall  case; it was concerned with
an opal tiara. think it was before your time, Watson. can only say,
madam, that shall be happy devote  same care your case as I
did that of your friend. As reward, my profession its own
reward; but you are at liberty defray whatever expenses may be put
to, at  time which suits you best.  now beg that you will lay
before us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon 
matter.”

“Alas!” replied our visitor, “ very horror of my situation lies in
 fact that my fears are so vague,  my suspicions depend so
entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial anor, that
even he whom of all ors have a right look for help 
advice looks upon all that tell him about it as  fancies of a
nervous woman. He does not say so, but can read it from hsoothing
answers  averted eyes. But have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can
see deeply in manifold wickedness of  human heart. You may
advise me how walk amid  dangers which encompass me.”

“am all attention, madam.”

“My name Helen Stoner,  am living with my stepfar, who is
 last survivor of one of  oldest Saxon families in Engl, 
Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on  western border of Surrey.”

Holmes nodded hhead. “ name familiar me,” said he.

“ family was at one time among  richest in Engl,  
estates extended over  borders inBerkshire in  north, 
Hampshire in  west. In  last century, however, four successive
heirs were of a dissolute  wasteful disposition,   family ruin
was eventually completed by a gambler in  days of  Regency.
Nothing was left save a few acres of ground,  
two-hundred-year-old house, which itself crushed under a heavy
mortgage.  last squire dragged out hexistence re, living 
horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but honly son, my
stepfar, seeing that he must adapt himself  new conditions,
obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him take a
medical degree  went out Calcutta, where, by hprofessional
skill  hforce of character, he established a large practice. In a
fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had been
perpetrated in  house, he beat hnative butler death 
narrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a long term
of imprisonment  afterwards returned Engl a morose 
disappointed man.

“When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mor, Mrs. Stoner, 
young widow of Major-General Stoner, of  Bengal Artillery. My sister
Julia  were twins,  we were only two years old at  time of
my mor’s re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of money—not less
than £ 1000 a year— thshe bequead Dr. Roylott entirely
while we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual sum
should be allowed each of us in  event of our marriage. Shortly
after our return Engl my mor died—she was killed eight years
ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott n aboned his
attempts establish himself in practice in London  took us live
with him in  old ancestral house at Stoke Moran.  money which my
mor had left was enough for all our wants,  re seemed be no
obstacle our happiness.

“But a terrible change came over our stepfar about thtime.
Instead of making friends  exchanging visits with our neighbours,
who had at first been overjoyed see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in
 old family seat, he shut himself up in hhouse  seldom came
out save indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross his
path. Violence of temper approaching mania has been hereditary in
 men of  family,  in my stepfar’s case it had, believe,
been intensified by hlong residence in  tropics. A series of
disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in  police-court,
until at last he became  terror of  village,   folks would
fly at happroach, for he a man of immense strength, 
absolutely uncontrollable in hanger.

“Last week he hurled  local blacksmith over a parapet ina stream,
 it was only by paying over all  money which could gar
toger that was able avert anor public exposure. He had no
friends at all save  wering gipsies,  he would give se
vagabonds leave encamp upon  few acres of bramble-covered l
which represent  family estate,  would accept in return 
hospitality of ir tents, wering away with m sometimes for
weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sent
over him by a correspondent,  he has at thmoment a cheetah 
a baboon, which wer freely over hgrounds  are feared by 
villagers almost as much as ir master.

“You can imagine from what say that my poor sister Julia  had no
great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us,  for a
long time we did all  work of  house. She was but thirty at 
time of her death,  yet her hair had already begun whiten, even
as mine has.”

“Your sister dead, n?”

“She died just two years ago,  it of her death that wish to
speak you. You can underst that, living  life which have
described, we were little likely see anyone of our own age 
position. We had, however, an aunt, my mor’s maiden sister, Miss
Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow,  we were occasionally
allowed pay short visits at thlady’s house. Julia went re at
Christmas two years ago,  met re a half-pay major of marines, to
whom she became engaged. My stepfar learned of  engagement when
my sister returned  offered no objection  marriage; but within
a fortnight of  day which had been fixed for  wedding, 
terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion.”

Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in hchair with heyes closed
 hhead sunk in a cushion, but he half opened hlids now 
glanced across at hvisitor.

“Pray be precise as details,” said he.

“It easy for me be so, for every event of that dreadful time is
seared inmy memory.  manor-house is, as have already said, very
old,  only one wing now inhabited.  bedrooms in thwing are
on  ground floor,  sitting-rooms being in  central block of
 buildings. Of se bedrooms  first Dr. Roylott’s,  second
my sister’s,   third my own. re no communication between
m, but y all open out in same corridor. Do make myself
plain?”

“Perfectly so.”

“ windows of  three rooms open out upon  lawn. That fatal
night Dr. Roylott had gone hroom early, though we knew that he
had not retired rest, for my sister was troubled by  smell of 
strong Indian cigars which it was hcustom smoke. She left her
room, refore,  came inmine, where she sat for some time,
chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o’clock she rose to
leave me, but she paused at  door  looked back.

“‘Tell me, Helen,’ said she, ‘have you ever heard anyone whistle in 
dead of  night?’

“‘Never,’ said I.

“‘suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in your
sleep?’

“‘Certainly not. But why?’

“‘Because during  last few nights have always, about three in 
morning, heard a low, clear whistle. am a light sleeper,  it has
awakened me. cannot tell where it came from—perhaps from  next
room, perhaps from  lawn. thought that would just ask you
wher you had heard it.’

“‘No, have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in  plantation.’

“‘Very likely.  yet if it were on  lawn, wonder that you did
not hear it also.’

“‘Ah, but sleep more heavily than you.’

“‘Well, it of no great consequence, at any rate.’ She smiled back at
me, closed my door,  a few moments later heard her key turn in 
lock.”

“Indeed,” said Holmes. “Was it your custom always lock yourselves in
at night?”

“Always.”

“ why?”

“think that mentioned you that  Doctor kept a cheetah  a
baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked.”

“Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement.”

“could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfortune
impressed me. My sister  I, you will recollect, were twins,  you
know how subtle are  links which bind two souls which are so closely
allied. It was a wild night.  wind was howling outside,   rain
was beating  splashing against  windows. Suddenly, amid all 
hubbub of  gale, re burst forth  wild scream of a terrified
woman. knew that it was my sister’s voice. sprang from my bed,
wrapped a shawl round me,  rushed in corridor. As opened my
door seemed hear a low whistle, such as my sister described,  a
few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen.
As ran down  passage, my sister’s door was unlocked,  revolved
slowly upon its hinges. stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing
what was about issue from it. By  light of  corridor-lamp I
saw my sister appear at  opening, her face blanched with terror, her
hs groping for help, her whole figure swaying  fro like that
of a drunkard. ran her  threw my arms round her, but at that
moment her knees seemed give way  she fell  ground. She
wrid as one who in terrible pain,  her limbs were dreadfully
convulsed. At first thought that she had not recognised me, but as I
bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which shall never
forget, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was  b!  speckled b!’ re
was something else which she would fain have said,  she stabbed with
her finger in air in  direction of  Doctor’s room, but a
fresh convulsion seized her  choked her words. rushed out, calling
loudly for my stepfar,  met him hastening from hroom in his
dressing-gown. When he reached my sister’s side she was unconscious,
 though he poured bry down her throat  sent for medical aid
from  village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank 
died without having recovered her consciousness. Such was  dreadful
end of my beloved sister.”

“One moment,” said Holmes, “are you sure about thwhistle 
metallic sound? Could you swear it?”

“That was what  county coroner asked me at  inquiry. It my
strong impression that heard it,  yet, among  crash of  gale
  creaking of an old house, may possibly have been deceived.”

“Was your sister dressed?”

“No, she was in her night-dress. In her right h was found 
charred stump of a match,  in her left a match-box.”

“Showing that she had struck a light  looked about her when 
alarm took place. That important.  what conclusions did 
coroner come to?”

“He investigated  case with great care, for Dr. Roylott’s conduct
had long been notorious in  county, but he was unable find any
satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that  door had been
fastened upon  inner side,   windows were blocked by
old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured every
night.  walls were carefully sounded,  were shown be quite
solid all round,   flooring was also thoroughly examined, with
 same result.  chimney wide, but barred up by four large
staples. It certain, refore, that my sister was quite alone when
she met her end. Besides, re were no marks of any violence upon
her.”

“How about poison?”

“ doctors examined her for it, but without success.”

“What do you think that thunfortunate lady died of, n?”

“It my belief that she died of pure fear  nervous shock, though
what it was that frightened her cannot imagine.”

“Were re gipsies in  plantation at  time?”

“Yes, re are nearly always some re.”

“Ah,  what did you gar from thallusion a b—a speckled
b?”

“Sometimes have thought that it was merely  wild talk of delirium,
sometimes that it may have referred some b of people, perhaps to
se very gipsies in  plantation. do not know wher  spotted
hkerchiefs which so many of m wear over ir heads might have
suggested  strange adjective which she used.”

Holmes shook hhead like a man who far from being satisfied.

“se are very deep waters,” said he; “pray go on with your
narrative.”

“Two years have passed since n,  my life has been until lately
lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom have
known for many years, has done me  honour ask my h in
marriage. Hname Armitage—Percy Armitage— second son of Mr.
Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfar has offered no
opposition  match,  we are be married in  course of 
spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in  west wing of 
building,  my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that have had to
move in chamber in which my sister died,  sleep in  very
bed in which she slept. Imagine, n, my thrill of terror when last
night, as lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, suddenly
heard in  silence of  night  low whistle which had been 
herald of her own death. sprang up  lit  lamp, but nothing was
be seen in  room. was too shaken go bed again, however,
so dressed,  as soon as it was daylight slipped down, got a
dog-cart at  Crown Inn, which opposite,  drove Learhead,
from whence have come on thmorning with  one object of seeing
you  asking your advice.”

“You have done wisely,” said my friend. “But have you told me all?”

“Yes, all.”

“Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfar.”

“Why, what do you mean?”

For answer Holmes pushed back  frill of black lace which fringed 
h that lay upon our visitor’s knee. Five little livid spots, 
marks of four fingers  a thumb, were printed upon  white wrist.

“You have been cruelly used,” said Holmes.

 lady coloured deeply  covered over her injured wrist. “He a
hard man,” she said, “ perhaps he hardly knows hown strength.”

re was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned hchin upon his
hs  stared in crackling fire.

“Tha very deep business,” he said at last. “re are a thous
details which should desire know before decide upon our course
of action. Yet we have not a moment lose. If we were come to
Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us see over se rooms
without  knowledge of your stepfar?”

“As it happens, he spoke of coming intown to-day upon some most
important business. It probable that he will be away all day, 
that re would be nothing disturb you. We have a housekeeper now,
but she old  foolish,  could easily get her out of  way.”

“Excellent. You are not averse thtrip, Watson?”

“By no means.”

“n we shall both come. What are you going do yourself?”

“have one or two things which would wish do now that am in
town. But shall return by  twelve o’clock train, so as be re
in time for your coming.”

“ you may expect us early in  afternoon. have myself some small
business matters attend to. Will you not wait  breakfast?”

“No, must go. My heart lightened already since have confided my
trouble you. shall look forward seeing you again this
afternoon.” She dropped her thick black veil over her face  glided
from  room.

“ what do you think of it all, Watson?” asked Sherlock Holmes,
leaning back in hchair.

“It seems me be a most dark  sinister business.”

“Dark enough  sinister enough.”

“Yet if  lady correct in saying that  flooring  walls are
sound,  that  door, window,  chimney are impassable, n her
sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious
end.”

“What becomes, n, of se nocturnal whistles,  what of  very
peculiar words of  dying woman?”

“cannot think.”

“When you combine  ideas of whistles at night,  presence of a
b of gipsies who are on intimate terms with thold doctor, 
fact that we have every reason believe that  doctor has an
interest in preventing hstepdaughter’s marriage,  dying allusion
a b, , finally,  fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a
metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars
that secured  shutters falling back inits place, think that
re good ground think that  mystery may be cleared along
those lines.”

“But what, n, did  gipsies do?”

“cannot imagine.”

“see many objections any such ory.”

“ so do I. It precisely for that reason that we are going to
Stoke Moran thday. want see wher  objections are fatal,
or if y may be explained away. But what in  name of  devil!”

 ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by  fact that our
door had been suddenly dashed open,  that a huge man had framed
himself in  aperture. Hcostume was a peculiar mixture of 
professional  of  agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long
frock-coat,  a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging in
hh. So tall was he that hhat actually brushed  cross bar of
 doorway,  hbreadth seemed span it across from side to
side. A large face, seared with a thous wrinkles, burned yellow with
 sun,  marked with every evil passion, was turned from one 
or of us, while hdeep-set, bile-shot eyes,  hhigh, thin,
fleshless nose, gave him somewhat  resemblance a fierce old bird
of prey.

“Which of you Holmes?” asked thapparition.

“My name, sir; but you have  advantage of me,” said my companion
quietly.

“am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran.”

“Indeed, Doctor,” said Holmes blly. “Pray take a seat.”

“will do nothing of  kind. My stepdaughter has been here. have
traced her. What has she been saying you?”

“It a little cold for  time of  year,” said Holmes.

“What has she been saying you?” screamed  old man furiously.

“But have heard that  crocuses promise well,” continued my
companion imperturbably.

“Ha! You put me off, do you?” said our new visitor, taking a step
forward  shaking hhunting-crop. “know you, you scoundrel! I
have heard of you before. You are Holmes,  meddler.”

My friend smiled.

“Holmes,  busybody!”

Hsmile broadened.

“Holmes,  Scotl Yard Jack-in-office!”

Holmes chuckled heartily. “Your conversation most entertaining,”
said he. “When you go out close  door, for re a decided
draught.”

“will go when have had my say. Don’t you dare meddle with my
affairs. know that Miss Stoner has been here. traced her! am a
dangerous man fall foul of! See here.” He stepped swiftly forward,
seized  poker,  bent it ina curve with hhuge brown hs.

“See that you keep yourself out of my grip,” he snarled,  hurling
 twisted poker in fireplace he strode out of  room.

“He seems a very amiable person,” said Holmes, laughing. “am not
quite so bulky, but if he had remained might have shown him that my
grip was not much more feeble than hown.” As he spoke he picked up
 steel poker , with a sudden effort, straightened it out again.

“Fancy hhaving  insolence confound me with  official
detective force! Thincident gives zest our investigation,
however,  only trust that our little friend will not suffer from
her imprudence in allowing thbrute trace her.  now, Watson, we
shall order breakfast,  afterwards shall walk down Doctors’
Commons, where hope get some data which may help us in this
matter.”

It was nearly one o’clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his
excursion. He held in hh a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over
with notes  figures.

“have seen  will of  deceased wife,” said he. “determine its
exact meaning have been obliged work out  present prices of 
investments with which it concerned.  total income, which at 
time of  wife’s death was little short of £ 1,100, now, through
 fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750. Each daughter can
claim an income of £ 250, in case of marriage. It evident,
refore, that if both girls had married, thbeauty would have had a
mere pittance, while even one of m would cripple him a very
serious extent. My morning’s work has not been wasted, since it has
proved that he has  very strongest motives for sting in  way
of anything of  sort.  now, Watson, thtoo serious for
dawdling, especially as  old man aware that we are interesting
ourselves in haffairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab 
drive Waterloo. should be very much obliged if you would slip your
revolver inyour pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 an excellent argument
with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers inknots. That  a
tooth-brush are, think, all that we need.”

At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Learhead,
where we hired a trap at  station inn  drove for four or five
miles through  lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with a
bright sun  a few fleecy clouds in  heavens.  trees 
wayside hedges were just throwing out ir first green shoots,  
air was full of  pleasant smell of  moist earth. me at least
re was a strange contrast between  sweet promise of  spring
 thsinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in
 front of  trap, harms folded, hhat pulled down over his
eyes,  hchin sunk upon hbreast, buried in  deepest thought.
Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on  shoulder,  pointed
over  meadows.

“Look re!” said he.

A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into
a grove at  highest point. From amid  branches re jutted out
 grey gables  high roof-tree of a very old mansion.

“Stoke Moran?” said he.

“Yes, sir, that be  house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott,” remarked 
driver.

“re some building going on re,” said Holmes; “that where we
are going.”

“re’s  village,” said  driver, pointing a cluster of roofs
some distance  left; “but if you want get  house, you’ll
find it shorter get over thstile,  so by  footpath over 
fields. re it is, where  lady walking.”

“  lady, fancy, Miss Stoner,” observed Holmes, shading his
eyes. “Yes, think we had better do as you suggest.”

We got off, paid our fare,   trap rattled back on its way to
Learhead.

“thought it as well,” said Holmes as we climbed  stile, “that this
fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definite
business. It may stop hgossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see
that we have been as good as our word.”

Our client of  morning had hurried forward meet us with a face
which spoke her joy. “have been waiting so eagerly for you,” she
cried, shaking hs with us warmly. “All has turned out splendidly.
Dr. Roylott has gone town,  it unlikely that he will be back
before evening.”

“We have had  pleasure of making  Doctor’s acquaintance,” said
Holmes,  in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. Miss
Stoner turned white  lips as she listened.

“Good heavens!” she cried, “he has followed me, n.”

“So it appears.”

“He so cunning that never know when am safe from him. What will
he say when he returns?”

“He must guard himself, for he may find that re someone more
cunning than himself upon htrack. You must lock yourself up from him
to-night. If he violent, we shall take you away your aunt’s at
Harrow. Now, we must make  best use of our time, so kindly take us
at once  rooms which we are examine.”

 building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central
portion  two curving wings, like  claws of a crab, thrown out on
each side. In one of se wings  windows were broken  blocked
with wooden boards, while  roof was partly caved in, a picture of
ruin.  central portion was in little better repair, but 
right-h block was comparatively modern,   blinds in 
windows, with  blue smoke curling up from  chimneys, showed that
thwas where  family resided. Some scaffolding had been erected
against  end wall,   stone-work had been broken into, but
re were no signs of any workmen at  moment of our visit. Holmes
walked slowly up  down  ill-trimmed lawn  examined with deep
attention  outsides of  windows.

“This, take it, belongs  room in which you used sleep, 
centre one your sister’s,   one next  main building to
Dr. Roylott’s chamber?”

“Exactly so. But am now sleeping in  middle one.”

“Pending  alterations, as underst. By  way, re does not
seem be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.”

“re were none. believe that it was an excuse move me from my
room.”

“Ah! that suggestive. Now, on  or side of thnarrow wing
runs  corridor from which se three rooms open. re are windows
in it, of course?”

“Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone pass through.”

“As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable
from that side. Now, would you have  kindness go inyour room
 bar your shutters?”

Miss Stoner did so,  Holmes, after a careful examination through 
open window, endeavoured in every way force  shutter open, but
without success. re was no slit through which a knife could be
passed raise  bar. n with hlens he tested  hinges, but
y were of solid iron, built firmly in massive masonry. “Hum!”
said he, scratching hchin in some perplexity, “my ory certainly
presents some difficulties. No one could pass se shutters if y
were bolted. Well, we shall see if  inside throws any light upon 
matter.”

A small side door led in whitewashed corridor from which 
three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused examine  third chamber, so
we passed at once  second, that in which Miss Stoner was now
sleeping,  in which her sister had met with her fate. It was a
homely little room, with a low ceiling  a gaping fireplace, after
 fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in
one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in anor,  a
dressing-table on  left-h side of  window. se articles,
with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all  furniture in 
room save for a square of Wilton carpet in  centre.  boards round
  panelling of  walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old
 discoloured that it may have dated from  original building of
 house. Holmes drew one of  chairs ina corner  sat silent,
while heyes travelled round  round  up  down, taking in
every detail of  apartment.

“Where does that bell communicate with?” he asked at last pointing a
thick bell-rope which hung down beside  bed,  tassel actually
lying upon  pillow.

“It goes  housekeeper’s room.”

“It looks newer than  or things?”

“Yes, it was only put re a couple of years ago.”

“Your sister asked for it, suppose?”

“No, never heard of her using it. We used always get what we
wanted for ourselves.”

“Indeed, it seemed unnecessary put so nice a bell-pull re. You
will excuse me for a few minutes while satisfy myself as this
floor.” He threw himself down upon hface with hlens in hh
 crawled swiftly backward  forward, examining minutely  cracks
between  boards. n he did  same with  wood-work with which
 chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over  bed  spent
some time in staring at it  in running heye up  down  wall.
Finally he took  bell-rope in hh  gave it a brisk tug.

“Why, it’s a dummy,” said he.

“Won’t it ring?”

“No, it not even attached a wire. Thvery interesting. You
can see now that it fastened a hook just above where  little
opening for  ventilator is.”

“How very absurd! never noticed that before.”

“Very strange!” muttered Holmes, pulling at  rope. “re are one or
two very singular points about throom. For example, what a fool a
builder must be open a ventilator inanor room, when, with 
same trouble, he might have communicated with  outside air!”

“That also quite modern,” said  lady.

“Done about  same time as  bell-rope?” remarked Holmes.

“Yes, re were several little changes carried out about that time.”

“y seem have been of a most interesting character—dummy
bell-ropes,  ventilators which do not ventilate. With your
permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches in
inner apartment.”

Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s chamber was larger than that of his
step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small wooden
shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an armchair
beside  bed, a plain wooden chair against  wall, a round table,
 a large iron safe were  principal things which met  eye.
Holmes walked slowly round  examined each  all of m with 
keenest interest.

“What’s in here?” he asked, tapping  safe.

“My stepfar’s business papers.”

“Oh! you have seen inside, n?”

“Only once, some years ago. remember that it was full of papers.”

“re isn’t a cat in it, for example?”

“No. What a strange idea!”

“Well, look at this!” He took up a small saucer of milk which stood on
 top of it.

“No; we don’t keep a cat. But re a cheetah  a baboon.”

“Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah just a big cat,  yet a
saucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, daresay.
re one point which should wish determine.” He squatted down
in front of  wooden chair  examined  seat of it with 
greatest attention.

“Thank you. That quite settled,” said he, rising  putting his
lens in hpocket. “Hullo! Here something interesting!”

 object which had caught heye was a small dog lash hung on one
corner of  bed.  lash, however, was curled upon itself  tied
so as make a loop of whipcord.

“What do you make of that, Watson?”

“It’s a common enough lash. But don’t know why it should be tied.”

“That not quite so common, it? Ah, me! it’s a wicked world, 
when a clever man turns hbrains crime it  worst of all. I
think that have seen enough now, Miss Stoner,  with your
permission we shall walk out upon  lawn.”

had never seen my friend’s face so grim or hbrow so dark as it was
when we turned from  scene of thinvestigation. We had walked
several times up  down  lawn, neir Miss Stoner nor myself
liking break in upon hthoughts before he roused himself from his
reverie.

“It very essential, Miss Stoner,” said he, “that you should
absolutely follow my advice in every respect.”

“shall most certainly do so.”

“ matter too serious for any hesitation. Your life may depend
upon your compliance.”

“assure you that am in your hs.”

“In  first place, both my friend  must spend  night in your
room.”

Both Miss Stoner  gazed at him in astonishment.

“Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. believe that that  village
inn over re?”

“Yes, that  Crown.”

“Very good. Your windows would be visible from re?”

“Certainly.”

“You must confine yourself your room, on pretence of a headache,
when your stepfar comes back. n when you hear him retire for 
night, you must open  shutters of your window, undo  hasp, put
your lamp re as a signal us,  n withdraw quietly with
everything which you are likely want in room which you used to
occupy. have no doubt that, in spite of  repairs, you could manage
re for one night.”

“Oh, yes, easily.”

“ rest you will leave in our hs.”

“But what will you do?”

“We shall spend  night in your room,  we shall investigate 
cause of thnoise which has disturbed you.”

“believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,” said
Miss Stoner, laying her h upon my companion’s sleeve.

“Perhaps have.”

“n, for pity’s sake, tell me what was  cause of my sister’s
death.”

“should prefer have clearer proofs before speak.”

“You can at least tell me wher my own thought correct,  if she
died from some sudden fright.”

“No, do not think so. think that re was probably some more
tangible cause.  now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr.
Roylott returned  saw us our journey would be in vain. Good-bye, 
be brave, for if you will do what have told you, you may rest assured
that we shall soon drive away  dangers that threaten you.”

Sherlock Holmes  had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom 
sitting-room at  Crown Inn. y were on  upper floor,  from
our window we could comm a view of  avenue gate,  of 
inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr. Grimesby
Roylott drive past, hhuge form looming up beside  little figure
of  lad who drove him.  boy had some slight difficulty in undoing
 heavy iron gates,  we heard  hoarse roar of  Doctor’s
voice  saw  fury with which he shook hclinched fists at him.
 trap drove on,  a few minutes later we saw a sudden light spring
up among  trees as  lamp was lit in one of  sitting-rooms.

“Do you know, Watson,” said Holmes as we sat toger in  garing
darkness, “have really some scruples as taking you to-night. re
a distinct element of danger.”

“Can be of assistance?”

“Your presence might be invaluable.”

“n shall certainly come.”

“It very kind of you.”

“You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in se rooms than
was visible me.”

“No, but fancy that may have deduced a little more. imagine that
you saw all that did.”

“saw nothing remarkable save  bell-rope,  what purpose that
could answer confess more than can imagine.”

“You saw  ventilator, too?”

“Yes, but do not think that it such a very unusual thing have a
small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could
hardly pass through.”

“knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came Stoke
Moran.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“Oh, yes, did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister
could smell Dr. Roylott’s cigar. Now, of course that suggested at once
that re must be a communication between  two rooms. It could only
be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at  coroner’s
inquiry. deduced a ventilator.”

“But what harm can re be in that?”

“Well, re at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilator
made, a cord hung,  a lady who sleeps in  bed dies. Does
not that strike you?”

“cannot as yet see any connection.”

“Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?”

“No.”

“It was clamped  floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like that
before?”

“cannot say that have.”

“ lady could not move her bed. It must always be in  same
relative position  ventilator   rope—or so we may call
it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.”

“Holmes,” cried, “seem see dimly what you are hinting at. We are
only just in time prevent some subtle  horrible crime.”

“Subtle enough  horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is
 first of criminals. He has nerve  he has knowledge. Palmer 
Pritchard were among  heads of ir profession. Thman strikes
even deeper, but think, Watson, that we shall be able strike
deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before  night is
over; for goodness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe  turn our minds
for a few hours something more cheerful.”

About nine o’clock  light among  trees was extinguished,  all
was dark in  direction of  Manor House. Two hours passed slowly
away,  n, suddenly, just at  stroke of eleven, a single bright
light shone out right in front of us.

“That our signal,” said Holmes, springing hfeet; “it comes
from  middle window.”

As we passed out he exchanged a few words with  llord, explaining
that we were going on a late visit an acquaintance,  that it was
possible that we might spend  night re. A moment later we were
out on  dark road, a chill wind blowing in our faces,  one yellow
light twinkling in front of us through  gloom guide us on our
sombre err.

re was little difficulty in entering  grounds, for unrepaired
breaches gaped in  old park wall. Making our way among  trees, we
reached  lawn, crossed it,  were about enter through 
window when out from a clump of laurel bushes re darted what seemed
be a hideous  distorted child, who threw itself upon  grass
with writhing limbs  n ran swiftly across  lawn in
darkness.

“My God!” whispered; “did you see it?”

Holmes was for  moment as startled as I. Hh closed like a vice
upon my wrist in hagitation. n he broke ina low laugh  put
hlips my ear.

“It a nice household,” he murmured. “That  baboon.”

had forgotten  strange pets which  Doctor affected. re was a
cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any
moment. confess that felt easier in my mind when, after following
Holmes’ example  slipping off my shoes, found myself inside 
bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed  shutters, moved  lamp
on table,  cast heyes round  room. All was as we had
seen it in  daytime. n creeping up me  making a trumpet of
hh, he whispered inmy ear again so gently that it was all that
could do distinguish  words:

“ least sound would be fatal our plans.”

nodded show that had heard.

“We must sit without light. He would see it through  ventilator.”

nodded again.

“Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol
ready in case we should need it. will sit on  side of  bed, 
you in that chair.”

took out my revolver  laid it on  corner of  table.

Holmes had brought up a long thin cane,  thhe placed upon  bed
beside him. By it he laid  box of matches   stump of a cle.
n he turned down  lamp,  we were left in darkness.

How shall ever forget that dreadful vigil? could not hear a sound,
not even  drawing of a breath,  yet knew that my companion sat
open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in  same state of nervous
tension in which was myself.  shutters cut off  least ray of
light,  we waited in absolute darkness.

From outside came  occasional cry of a night-bird,  once at our
very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that  cheetah
was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear  deep tones of 
parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long y
seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck,  one  two  three, 
still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.

Suddenly re was  momentary gleam of a light up in  direction
of  ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a
strong smell of burning oil  heated metal. Someone in  next room
had lit a dark-lantern. heard a gentle sound of movement,  n
all was silent once more, though  smell grew stronger. For half an
hour sat with straining ears. n suddenly anor sound became
audible—a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of
steam escaping continually from a kettle.  instant that we heard it,
Holmes sprang from  bed, struck a match,  lashed furiously with
hcane at  bell-pull.

“You see it, Watson?” he yelled. “You see it?”

But saw nothing. At  moment when Holmes struck  light heard a
low, clear whistle, but  sudden glare flashing inmy weary eyes
made it impossible for me tell what it was at which my friend lashed
so savagely. could, however, see that hface was deadly pale 
filled with horror  loathing. He had ceased strike  was gazing
up at  ventilator when suddenly re broke from  silence of 
night  most horrible cry which have ever listened. It swelled
up louder  louder, a hoarse yell of pain  fear  anger all
mingled in  one dreadful shriek. y say that away down in 
village,  even in  distant parsonage, that cry raised 
sleepers from ir beds. It struck cold our hearts,  stood
gazing at Holmes,  he at me, until  last echoes of it had died
away in silence from which it rose.

“What can it mean?” gasped.

“It means that it all over,” Holmes answered. “ perhaps, after
all, it for  best. Take your pistol,  we will enter Dr.
Roylott’s room.”

With a grave face he lit  lamp  led  way down  corridor.
Twice he struck at  chamber door without any reply from within. n
he turned  hle  entered, at hheels, with  cocked
pistol in my h.

It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On  table stood a
dark-lantern with  shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of
light upon  iron safe,  door of which was ajar. Beside this
table, on  wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long
grey dressing-gown, hbare ankles protruding beneath,  hfeet
thrust inred heelless Turkish slippers. Across hlap lay  short
stock with  long lash which we had noticed during  day. Hchin
was cocked upward  heyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at
 corner of  ceiling. Round hbrow he had a peculiar yellow
b, with brownish speckles, which seemed be bound tightly round
hhead. As we entered he made neir sound nor motion.

“ b!  speckled b!” whispered Holmes.

took a step forward. In an instant hstrange headgear began to
move,  re reared itself from among hhair  squat
diamond-shaped head  puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.

“It a swamp adder!” cried Holmes; “ deadliest snake in India. He
has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth,
recoil upon  violent,   schemer falls in pit which he
digs for anor. Let us thrust thcreature back inits den,  we
can n remove Miss Stoner some place of shelter  let  county
police know what has happened.”

As he spoke he drew  dog-whip swiftly from  dead man’s lap, 
throwing  noose round  reptile’s neck he drew it from its horrid
perch , carrying it at arm’s length, threw it in iron safe,
which he closed upon it.

Such are  true facts of  death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke
Moran. It not necessary that should prolong a narrative which has
already run too great a length by telling how we broke  sad news
 terrified girl, how we conveyed her by  morning train 
care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how  slow process of official
inquiry came  conclusion that  doctor met hfate while
indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet.  little which had yet
learn of  case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled
back next day.

“had,” said he, “come an entirely erroneous conclusion which
shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always reason from
insufficient data.  presence of  gipsies,   use of  word
‘b,’ which was used by  poor girl, no doubt, explain 
appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by  light of
her match, were sufficient put me upon an entirely wrong scent. I
can only claim  merit that instantly reconsidered my position
when, however, it became clear me that whatever danger threatened an
occupant of  room could not come eir from  window or  door.
My attention was speedily drawn, as have already remarked you, to
thventilator,   bell-rope which hung down  bed. 
discovery that thwas a dummy,  that  bed was clamped 
floor, instantly gave rise  suspicion that  rope was re as
a bridge for something passing through  hole  coming  bed.
 idea of a snake instantly occurred me,  when coupled it
with my knowledge that  doctor was furnished with a supply of
creatures from India, felt that was probably on  right track.
 idea of using a form of poison which could not possibly be
discovered by any chemical test was just such a one as would occur a
clever  ruthless man who had had an Eastern training.  rapidity
with which such a poison would take effect would also, from hpoint
of view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who
could distinguish  two little dark punctures which would show where
 poison fangs had done ir work. n thought of  whistle. Of
course he must recall  snake before  morning light revealed it to
 victim. He had trained it, probably by  use of  milk which we
saw, return him when summoned. He would put it through this
ventilator at  hour that he thought best, with  certainty that it
would crawl down  rope  l on  bed. It might or might not
bite  occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but
sooner or later she must fall a victim.

“had come se conclusions before ever had entered hroom. An
inspection of hchair showed me that he had been in  habit of
sting on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he
should reach  ventilator.  sight of  safe,  saucer of milk,
  loop of whipcord were enough finally dispel any doubts which
may have remained.  metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was
obviously caused by her stepfar hastily closing  door of hsafe
upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know 
steps which took in order put  matter  proof. heard 
creature hiss as have no doubt that you did also,  instantly lit
 light  attacked it.”

“With  result of driving it through  ventilator.”

“ also with  result of causing it turn upon its master at 
or side. Some of  blows of my cane came home  roused its
snakish temper, so that it flew upon  first person it saw. In this
way am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s
death,  cannot say that it likely weigh very heavily upon my
conscience.”



IX.  ADVENTURE OF  ENGINEER’S THUMB

Of all  problems which have been submitted my friend, Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, for solution during  years of our intimacy, re
were only two which was  means of introducing hnotice—that
of Mr. Harley’s thumb,  that of Colonel Warburton’s madness. Of
se  latter may have afforded a finer field for an acute 
original observer, but  or was so strange in its inception  so
dramatic in its details that it may be  more worthy of being placed
upon record, even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those
deductive methods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable
results.  story has, believe, been told more than once in 
newspapers, but, like all such narratives, its effect much less
striking when set forth _en bloc_ in a single half-column of print than
when  facts slowly evolve before your own eyes,   mystery
clears gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which
leads on  complete truth. At  time  circumstances made a
deep impression upon me,   lapse of two years has hardly served
weaken  effect.

It was in  summer of ’89, not long after my marriage, that 
events occurred which am now about summarise. had returned to
civil practice  had finally aboned Holmes in hBaker Street
rooms, although continually visited him  occasionally even
persuaded him forgo hBohemian habits so far as come  visit
us. My practice had steadily increased,  as happened live at no
very great distance from Paddington Station, got a few patients from
among  officials. One of se, whom had cured of a painful 
lingering disease, was never weary of advertising my virtues  of
endeavouring send me on every sufferer over whom he might have any
influence.

One morning, at a little before seven o’clock, was awakened by 
maid tapping at  door announce that two men had come from
Paddington  were waiting in  consulting-room. dressed
hurriedly, for knew by experience that railway cases were seldom
trivial,  hastened downstairs. As descended, my old ally, 
guard, came out of  room  closed  door tightly behind him.

“I’ve got him here,” he whispered, jerking hthumb over hshoulder;
“he’s all right.”

“What it, n?” asked, for hmanner suggested that it was some
strange creature which he had caged up in my room.

“It’s a new patient,” he whispered. “thought I’d bring him round
myself; n he couldn’t slip away. re he is, all safe  sound. I
must go now, Doctor; have my dooties, just  same as you.”  off
he went, thtrusty tout, without even giving me time thank him.

entered my consulting-room  found a gentleman seated by  table.
He was quietly dressed in a suit of hear tweed with a soft cloth cap
which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of hhs he had a
hkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with bloodstains. He
was young, not more than five--twenty, should say, with a strong,
masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale  gave me  impression
of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took
all hstrength of mind control.

“am sorry knock you up so early, Doctor,” said he, “but have had
a very serious accident during  night. came in by train this
morning,  on inquiring at Paddington as where might find a
doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. gave  maid a
card, but see that she has left it upon  side-table.”

took it up  glanced at it. “Mr. Victor Harley, hydraulic
engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor).” That was  name, style,
 abode of my morning visitor. “regret that have kept you
waiting,” said I, sitting down in my library-chair. “You are fresh from
a night journey, underst, which in itself a monotonous
occupation.”

“Oh, my night could not be called monotonous,” said he,  laughed. He
laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in his
chair  shaking hsides. All my medical instincts rose up against
that laugh.

“Stop it!” cried; “pull yourself toger!”  poured out some
water from a caraffe.

It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical
outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis
over  gone. Presently he came himself once more, very weary 
pale-looking.

“have been making a fool of myself,” he gasped.

“Not at all. Drink this.” dashed some bry in water,  
colour began come back hbloodless cheeks.

“That’s better!” said he. “ now, Doctor, perhaps you would kindly
attend my thumb, or rar  place where my thumb used be.”

He unwound  hkerchief  held out hh. It gave even my
hardened nerves a shudder look at it. re were four protruding
fingers  a horrid red, spongy surface where  thumb should have
been. It had been hacked or torn right out from  roots.

“Good heavens!” cried, “tha terrible injury. It must have bled
considerably.”

“Yes, it did. fainted when it was done,  think that must have
been senseless for a long time. When came found that it was
still bleeding, so tied one end of my hkerchief very tightly round
 wrist  braced it up with a twig.”

“Excellent! You should have been a surgeon.”

“It a question of hydraulics, you see,  came within my own
province.”

“Thhas been done,” said I, examining  wound, “by a very heavy 
sharp instrument.”

“A thing like a cleaver,” said he.

“An accident, presume?”

“By no means.”

“What! a murderous attack?”

“Very murderous indeed.”

“You horrify me.”

sponged  wound, cleaned it, dressed it,  finally covered it
over with cotton wadding  carbolised bages. He lay back without
wincing, though he bit hlip from time time.

“How that?” asked when had finished.

“Capital! Between your bry  your bage, feel a new man. was
very weak, but have had a good deal go through.”

“Perhaps you had better not speak of  matter. It evidently trying
your nerves.”

“Oh, no, not now. shall have tell my tale  police; but,
between ourselves, if it were not for  convincing evidence of this
wound of mine, should be surprised if y believed my statement, for
it a very extraordinary one,  have not much in  way of proof
with which back it up; , even if y believe me,  clues which
can give m are so vague that it a question wher justice will
be done.”

“Ha!” cried I, “if it anything in  nature of a problem which you
desire see solved, should strongly recommend you come my
friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go  official police.”

“Oh, have heard of that fellow,” answered my visitor, “ should
be very glad if he would take  matter up, though of course must
use  official police as well. Would you give me an introduction to
him?”

“I’ll do better. I’ll take you round him myself.”

“should be immensely obliged you.”

“We’ll call a cab  go toger. We shall just be in time have a
little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal it?”

“Yes; shall not feel easy until have told my story.”

“n my servant will call a cab,  shall be with you in an
instant.” rushed upstairs, explained  matter shortly my wife,
 in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my new
acquaintance Baker Street.

Sherlock Holmes was, as expected, lounging about hsitting-room in
hdressing-gown, reading  agony column of _ Times_  smoking
hbefore-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all  plugs 
dottles left from hsmokes of  day before, all carefully dried 
collected on  corner of  mantelpiece. He received us in his
quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers  eggs,  joined us
in a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance
upon  sofa, placed a pillow beneath hhead,  laid a glass of
bry  water within hreach.

“It easy see that your experience has been no common one, Mr.
Harley,” said he. “Pray, lie down re  make yourself absolutely
at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired  keep up
your strength with a little stimulant.”

“Thank you,” said my patient, “but have felt anor man since 
doctor baged me,  think that your breakfast has completed 
cure. shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so I
shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.”

Holmes sat in hbig armchair with  weary, heavy-lidded expression
which veiled hkeen  eager nature, while sat opposite him,
 we listened in silence  strange story which our visitor
detailed us.

“You must know,” said he, “that am an orphan  a bachelor, residing
alone in lodgings in London. By profession am a hydraulic engineer,
 have had considerable experience of my work during  seven
years that was apprenticed Venner & Mason,  well-known firm,
of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time,  having also
come ina fair sum of money through my poor far’s death, I
determined start in business for myself  took professional
chambers in Victoria Street.

“suppose that everyone finds hfirst independent start in business
a dreary experience. me it has been exceptionally so. During two
years have had three consultations  one small job,  that is
absolutely all that my profession has brought me. My gross takings
amount £ 27 10_s_. Every day, from nine in  morning until four in
 afternoon, waited in my little den, until at last my heart began
sink,  came believe that should never have any practice at
all.

“Yesterday, however, just as was thinking of leaving  office, my
clerk entered say re was a gentleman waiting who wished see me
upon business. He brought up a card, too, with  name of ‘Colonel
Lyser Stark’ engraved upon it. Close at hheels came  colonel
himself, a man rar over  middle size, but of an exceeding
thinness. do not think that have ever seen so thin a man. Hwhole
face sharpened away innose  chin,   skin of hcheeks was
drawn quite tense over houtsting bones. Yet themaciation
seemed be hnatural habit,  due no disease, for heye was
bright, hstep brisk,  hbearing assured. He was plainly but
neatly dressed,  hage, should judge, would be nearer forty than
thirty.

“‘Mr. Harley?’ said he, with something of a German accent. ‘You have
been recommended me, Mr. Harley, as being a man who not only
proficient in hprofession but also discreet  capable of
preserving a secret.’

“bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such an
address. ‘May ask who it was who gave me so good a character?’

“‘Well, perhaps it better that should not tell you that just at
thmoment. have it from  same source that you are both an orphan
 a bachelor  are residing alone in London.’

“‘That quite correct,’ answered; ‘but you will excuse me if say
that cannot see how all thbears upon my professional
qualifications. underst that it was on a professional matter that
you wished speak me?’

“‘Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all say really 
point. have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecy
quite essential—absolute secrecy, you underst,  of course we
may expect that more from a man who alone than from one who lives in
 bosom of hfamily.’

“‘If promise keep a secret,’ said I, ‘you may absolutely depend
upon my doing so.’

“He looked very hard at me as spoke,  it seemed me that had
never seen so suspicious  questioning an eye.

“‘Do you promise, n?’ said he at last.

“‘Yes, promise.’

“‘Absolute  complete silence before, during,  after? No reference
 matter at all, eir in word or writing?’

“‘have already given you my word.’

“‘Very good.’ He suddenly sprang up,  darting like lightning across
 room he flung open  door.  passage outside was empty.

“‘That’s all right,’ said he, coming back. ‘know that clerks are
sometimes curious as ir master’s affairs. Now we can talk in
safety.’ He drew up hchair very close mine  began stare at
me again with  same questioning  thoughtful look.

“A feeling of repulsion,  of something akin fear had begun to
rise within me at  strange antics of thfleshless man. Even my
dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing my
impatience.

“‘beg that you will state your business, sir,’ said I; ‘my time of
value.’ Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but  words came to
my lips.

“‘How would fifty guineas for a night’s work suit you?’ he asked.

“‘Most admirably.’

“‘say a night’s work, but an hour’s would be nearer  mark. I
simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has
got out of gear. If you show us what wrong we shall soon set it
right ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?’

“‘ work appears be light   pay munificent.’

“‘Precisely so. We shall want you come to-night by  last train.’

“‘Where to?’

“‘Eyford, in Berkshire. It a little place near  borders of
Oxfordshire,  within seven miles of Reading. re a train from
Paddington which would bring you re at about 11:15.’

“‘Very good.’

“‘shall come down in a carriage meet you.’

“‘re a drive, n?’

“‘Yes, our little place quite out in  country. It a good seven
miles from Eyford Station.’

“‘n we can hardly get re before midnight. suppose re would
be no chance of a train back. should be compelled stop  night.’

“‘Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.’

“‘That very awkward. Could not come at some more convenient hour?’

“‘We have judged it best that you should come late. It recompense
you for any inconvenience that we are paying you, a young 
unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from  very heads of
your profession. Still, of course, if you would like draw out of 
business, re plenty of time do so.’

“thought of  fifty guineas,  of how very useful y would be
me. ‘Not at all,’ said I, ‘shall be very happy accommodate
myself your wishes. should like, however, underst a little
more clearly what it that you wish me do.’

“‘Quite so. It very natural that  pledge of secrecy which we have
exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. have no wish to
commit you anything without your having it all laid before you. I
suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?’

“‘Entirely.’

“‘n  matter sts thus. You are probably aware that
fuller’s-earth a valuable product,  that it only found in one
or two places in Engl?’

“‘have heard so.’

“‘Some little time ago bought a small place—a very small place—within
ten miles of Reading. was fortunate enough discover that re was
a deposit of fuller’s-earth in one of my fields. On examining it,
however, found that thdeposit was a comparatively small one, 
that it formed a link between two very much larger ones upon  right
 left—both of m, however, in  grounds of my neighbours. se
good people were absolutely ignorant that ir l contained that
which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was my
interest buy ir l before y discovered its true value, but
unfortunately had no capital by which could do this. took a few
of my friends in secret, however,  y suggested that we
should quietly  secretly work our own little deposit  that in
thway we should earn  money which would enable us buy 
neighbouring fields. Thwe have now been doing for some time,  in
order help us in our operations we erected a hydraulic press. This
press, as have already explained, has got out of order,  we wish
your advice upon  subject. We guard our secret very jealously,
however,  if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineers
coming our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry,  n, if
 facts came out, it would be good-bye any chance of getting se
fields  carrying out our plans. That why have made you promise
me that you will not tell a human being that you are going Eyford
to-night. hope that make it all plain?’

“‘quite follow you,’ said I. ‘ only point which could not quite
underst was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in
excavating fuller’s-earth, which, as underst, dug out like
gravel from a pit.’

“‘Ah!’ said he carelessly, ‘we have our own process. We compress 
earth inbricks, so as remove m without revealing what y
are. But that a mere detail. have taken you fully inmy
confidence now, Mr. Harley,  have shown you how trust you.’
He rose as he spoke. ‘shall expect you, n, at Eyford at 11:15.’

“‘shall certainly be re.’

“‘ not a word a soul.’ He looked at me with a last long,
questioning gaze,  n, pressing my h in a cold, dank grasp, he
hurried from  room.

“Well, when came think it all over in cool blood was very much
astonished, as you may both think, at thsudden commission which had
been intrusted me. On  one h, of course, was glad, for 
fee was at least tenfold what should have asked had set a price
upon my own services,  it was possible that thorder might lead to
or ones. On  or h,  face  manner of my patron had
made an unpleasant impression upon me,  could not think that his
explanation of  fuller’s-earth was sufficient explain 
necessity for my coming at midnight,  hextreme anxiety lest I
should tell anyone of my err. However, threw all fears 
winds, ate a hearty supper, drove Paddington,  started off,
having obeyed  letter  injunction as holding my tongue.

“At Reading had change not only my carriage but my station.
However, was in time for  last train Eyford,  reached 
little dim-lit station after eleven o’clock. was  only passenger
who got out re,  re was no one upon  platform save a single
sleepy porter with a lantern. As passed out through  wicket gate,
however, found my acquaintance of  morning waiting in  shadow
upon  or side. Without a word he grasped my arm  hurried me
ina carriage,  door of which was sting open. He drew up 
windows on eir side, tapped on  wood-work,  away we went as
fast as  horse could go.”

“One horse?” interjected Holmes.

“Yes, only one.”

“Did you observe  colour?”

“Yes, saw it by  side-lights when was stepping in
carriage. It was a chestnut.”

“Tired-looking or fresh?”

“Oh, fresh  glossy.”

“Thank you. am sorry have interrupted you. Pray continue your most
interesting statement.”

“Away we went n,  we drove for at least an hour. Colonel Lyser
Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but should think, from
 rate that we seemed go,  from  time that we took, that it
must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in silence all 
time,  was aware, more than once when glanced in hdirection,
that he was looking at me with great intensity.  country roads seem
be not very good in that part of  world, for we lurched 
jolted terribly. tried look out of  windows see something of
where we were, but y were made of frosted glass,  could make
out nothing save  occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now 
n hazarded some remark break  monotony of  journey, but
 colonel answered only in monosyllables,   conversation soon
flagged. At last, however,  bumping of  road was exchanged for
 crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive,   carriage came a
st. Colonel Lyser Stark sprang out, , as followed after him,
pulled me swiftly ina porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped,
as it were, right out of  carriage  in hall, so that I
failed catch  most fleeting glance of  front of  house. 
instant that had crossed  threshold  door slammed heavily
behind us,  heard faintly  rattle of  wheels as  carriage
drove away.

“It was pitch dark inside  house,   colonel fumbled about
looking for matches  muttering under hbreath. Suddenly a door
opened at  or end of  passage,  a long, golden bar of light
shot out in our direction. It grew broader,  a woman appeared with a
lamp in her h, which she held above her head, pushing her face
forward  peering at us. could see that she was pretty,  from
 gloss with which  light shone upon her dark dress knew that it
was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a
tone as though asking a question,  when my companion answered in a
gruff monosyllable she gave such a start that  lamp nearly fell from
her h. Colonel Stark went up her, whispered something in her ear,
 n, pushing her back in room from whence she had come, he
walked towards me again with  lamp in hh.

“‘Perhaps you will have  kindness wait in throom for a few
minutes,’ said he, throwing open anor door. It was a quiet, little,
plainly furnished room, with a round table in  centre, on which
several German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down  lamp
on  top of a harmonium beside  door. ‘shall not keep you
waiting an instant,’ said he,  vanished in darkness.

“glanced at  books upon  table,  in spite of my ignorance of
German could see that two of m were treatises on science, 
ors being volumes of poetry. n walked across  window,
hoping that might catch some glimpse of  country-side, but an oak
shutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was a wonderfully
silent house. re was an old clock ticking loudly somewhere in 
passage, but orwise everything was deadly still. A vague feeling of
uneasiness began steal over me. Who were se German people, 
what were y doing living in thstrange, out-of--way place? 
where was  place? was ten miles or so from Eyford, that was all I
knew, but wher north, south, east, or west had no idea. For that
matter, Reading,  possibly or large towns, were within that
radius, so  place might not be so secluded, after all. Yet it was
quite certain, from  absolute stillness, that we were in 
country. paced up  down  room, humming a tune under my breath
keep up my spirits  feeling that was thoroughly earning my
fifty-guinea fee.

“Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in  midst of  utter
stillness,  door of my room swung slowly open.  woman was
sting in  aperture,  darkness of  hall behind her, 
yellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager  beautiful face. I
could see at a glance that she was sick with fear,   sight sent a
chill my own heart. She held up one shaking finger warn me be
silent,  she shot a few whispered words of broken English at me, her
eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, in gloom
behind her.

“‘would go,’ said she, trying hard, as it seemed me, speak
calmly; ‘would go. should not stay here. re no good for you
do.’

“‘But, madam,’ said I, ‘have not yet done what came for. cannot
possibly leave until have seen  machine.’

“‘It not worth your while wait,’ she went on. ‘You can pass
through  door; no one hinders.’  n, seeing that smiled 
shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint  made a step
forward, with her hs wrung toger. ‘For  love of Heaven!’ she
whispered, ‘get away from here before it too late!’

“But am somewhat headstrong by nature,   more ready engage
in an affair when re some obstacle in  way. thought of my
fifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey,  of  unpleasant night
which seemed be before me. Was it all go for nothing? Why should
slink away without having carried out my commission,  without 
payment which was my due? Thwoman might, for all knew, be a
monomaniac. With a stout bearing, refore, though her manner had
shaken me more than cared confess, still shook my head 
declared my intention of remaining where was. She was about renew
her entreaties when a door slammed overhead,   sound of several
footsteps was heard upon  stairs. She listened for an instant, threw
up her hs with a despairing gesture,  vanished as suddenly  as
noiselessly as she had come.

“ newcomers were Colonel Lyser Stark  a short thick man with a
chinchilla beard growing out of  creases of hdouble chin, who was
introduced me as Mr. Ferguson.

“‘Thmy secretary  manager,’ said  colonel. ‘By  way, I
was under  impression that left thdoor shut just now. fear
that you have felt  draught.’

“‘On  contrary,’ said I, ‘opened  door myself because felt
 room be a little close.’

“He shot one of hsuspicious looks at me. ‘Perhaps we had better
proceed business, n,’ said he. ‘Mr. Ferguson  will take you
up see  machine.’

“‘had better put my hat on, suppose.’

“‘Oh, no, it in  house.’

“‘What, you dig fuller’s-earth in  house?’

“‘No, no. Thonly where we compress it. But never mind that. All
we wish you do examine  machine  let us know what is
wrong with it.’

“We went upstairs toger,  colonel first with  lamp,  fat
manager  behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with
corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases,  little low doors,
 thresholds of which were hollowed out by  generations who had
crossed m. re were no carpets  no signs of any furniture above
 ground floor, while  plaster was peeling off  walls,  
damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. tried put
on as unconcerned an air as possible, but had not forgotten 
warnings of  lady, even though disregarded m,  kept a keen
eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared be a morose  silent
man, but could see from  little that he said that he was at least
a fellow-countryman.

“Colonel Lyser Stark stopped at last before a low door, which he
unlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which  three of us
could hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside,  
colonel ushered me in.

“‘We are now,’ said he, ‘actually within  hydraulic press,  it
would be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were turn
it on.  ceiling of thsmall chamber really  end of 
descending piston,  it comes down with  force of many tons upon
thmetal floor. re are small lateral columns of water outside
which receive  force,  which transmit  multiply it in 
manner which familiar you.  machine goes readily enough, but
re some stiffness in  working of it,  it has lost a little
of its force. Perhaps you will have  goodness look it over  to
show us how we can set it right.’

“took  lamp from him,  examined  machine very thoroughly.
It was indeed a gigantic one,  capable of exercising enormous
pressure. When passed outside, however,  pressed down  levers
which controlled it, knew at once by  whishing sound that re
was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water through
one of  side cylinders. An examination showed that one of 
india-rubber bs which was round  head of a driving-rod had shrunk
so as not quite fill  socket along which it worked. Thwas
clearly  cause of  loss of power,  pointed it out my
companions, who followed my remarks very carefully  asked several
practical questions as how y should proceed set it right. When
had made it clear m, returned  main chamber of 
machine  took a good look at it satisfy my own curiosity. It was
obvious at a glance that  story of  fuller’s-earth was  merest
fabrication, for it would be absurd suppose that so powerful an
engine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose.  walls were of
wood, but  floor consisted of a large iron trough,  when came
examine it could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it. I
had stooped  was scraping at thsee exactly what it was when I
heard a muttered exclamation in German  saw  cadaverous face of
 colonel looking down at me.

“‘What are you doing re?’ he asked.

“felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as that
which he had told me. ‘was admiring your fuller’s-earth,’ said I; ‘I
think that should be better able advise you as your machine if
knew what  exact purpose was for which it was used.’

“ instant that uttered  words regretted  rashness of my
speech. Hface set hard,  a baleful light sprang up in hgrey
eyes.

“‘Very well,’ said he, ‘you shall know all about  machine.’ He took
a step backward, slammed  little door,  turned  key in 
lock. rushed towards it  pulled at  hle, but it was quite
secure,  did not give in  least my kicks  shoves. ‘Hullo!’
yelled. ‘Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!’

“ n suddenly in  silence heard a sound which sent my heart
inmy mouth. It was  clank of  levers   swish of 
leaking cylinder. He had set  engine at work.  lamp still stood
upon  floor where had placed it when examining  trough. By its
light saw that  black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly,
jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a force which must
within a minute grind me a shapeless pulp. threw myself,
screaming, against  door,  dragged with my nails at  lock. I
implored  colonel let me out, but  remorseless clanking of 
levers drowned my cries.  ceiling was only a foot or two above my
head,  with my h upraised could feel its hard, rough surface.
n it flashed through my mind that  pain of my death would depend
very much upon  position in which met it. If lay on my face 
weight would come upon my spine,  shuddered think of that
dreadful snap. Easier  or way, perhaps;  yet, had  nerve
lie  look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon me?
Already was unable st erect, when my eye caught something which
brought a gush of hope back my heart.

“have said that though  floor  ceiling were of iron,  walls
were of wood. As gave a last hurried glance around, saw a thin line
of yellow light between two of  boards, which broadened 
broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant could
hardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from death.
 next instant threw myself through,  lay half-fainting upon 
or side.  panel had closed again behind me, but  crash of 
lamp,  a few moments afterwards  clang of  two slabs of metal,
told me how narrow had been my escape.

“was recalled myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist,  I
found myself lying upon  stone floor of a narrow corridor, while a
woman bent over me  tugged at me with her left h, while she held
a cle in her right. It was  same good friend whose warning had
so foolishly rejected.

“‘Come! come!’ she cried breathlessly. ‘y will be here in a moment.
y will see that you are not re. Oh, do not waste  so-precious
time, but come!’

“Thtime, at least, did not scorn her advice. staggered my
feet  ran with her along  corridor  down a winding stair. 
latter led anor broad passage,  just as we reached it we heard
 sound of running feet   shouting of two voices, one answering
 or from  floor on which  we were  from  one beneath. My
guide stopped  looked about her like one  who at her wit’s end.
n she threw open a door which led ina bedroom, through  window
of which  moon was shining brightly.

“‘It your only chance,’ said she. ‘It high, but it may be that
you can jump it.’

“As she spoke a light sprang inview at  furr end of 
passage,  saw  lean figure of Colonel Lyser Stark rushing
forward with a lantern in one h  a weapon like a butcher’s
cleaver in  or. rushed across  bedroom, flung open 
window,  looked out. How quiet  sweet  wholesome  garden
looked in  moonlight,  it could not be more than thirty feet
down. clambered out upon  sill, but hesitated jump until I
should have heard what passed between my saviour   ruffian who
pursued me. If she were ill-used, n at any risks was determined to
go back her assistance.  thought had hardly flashed through my
mind before he was at  door, pushing hway past her; but she threw
her arms round him  tried hold him back.

“‘Fritz! Fritz!’ she cried in English, ‘remember your promise after 
last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh, he
will be silent!’

“‘You are mad, Elise!’ he shouted, struggling break away from her.
‘You will be  ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, say!’
He dashed her one side, , rushing  window, cut at me with
hheavy weapon. had let myself go,  was hanging by  hs to
 sill, when hblow fell. was conscious of a dull pain, my grip
loosened,  fell in garden below.

“was shaken but not hurt by  fall; so picked myself up 
rushed off among  bushes as hard as could run, for understood
that was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as I
ran, a deadly dizziness  sickness came over me. glanced down at my
h, which was throbbing painfully,  n, for  first time, saw
that my thumb had been cut off  that  blood was pouring from my
wound. endeavoured tie my hkerchief round it, but re came a
sudden buzzing in my ears,  next moment fell in a dead faint among
 rose-bushes.

“How long remained unconscious cannot tell. It must have been a
very long time, for  moon had sunk,  a bright morning was
breaking when came myself. My clos were all sodden with dew,
 my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. 
smarting of it recalled in an instant all  particulars of my night’s
adventure,  sprang my feet with  feeling that might hardly
yet be safe from my pursuers. But my astonishment, when came to
look round me, neir house nor garden were be seen. had been
lying in an angle of  hedge close by  highroad,  just a little
lower down was a long building, which proved, upon my approaching it,
be  very station at which had arrived upon  previous night.
Were it not for  ugly wound upon my h, all that had passed during
those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream.

“Half dazed, went in station  asked about  morning train.
re would be one Reading in less than an hour.  same porter was
on duty, found, as had been re when arrived. inquired of him
wher he had ever heard of Colonel Lyser Stark.  name was
strange him. Had he observed a carriage  night before waiting for
me? No, he had not. Was re a police-station anywhere near? re was
one about three miles off.

“It was too far for me go, weak  ill as was. determined to
wait until got back town before telling my story  police. It
was a little past six when arrived, so went first have my wound
dressed,  n  doctor was kind enough bring me along here. I
put  case inyour hs  shall do exactly what you advise.”

We both sat in silence for some little time after listening this
extraordinary narrative. n Sherlock Holmes pulled down from 
shelf one of  ponderous commonplace books in which he placed his
cuttings.

“Here an advertisement which will interest you,” said he. “It
appeared in all  papers about a year ago. Listen this: ‘Lost, on
 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulic
engineer. Left hlodgings at ten o’clock at night,  has not been
heard of since. Was dressed in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That represents 
last time that  colonel needed have hmachine overhauled, I
fancy.”

“Good heavens!” cried my patient. “n that explains what  girl
said.”

“Undoubtedly. It quite clear that  colonel was a cool 
desperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should st
in  way of hlittle game, like those out--out pirates who will
leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now is
precious, so if you feel equal it we shall go down Scotl Yard
at once as a preliminary starting for Eyford.”

Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in  train toger,
bound from Reading  little Berkshire village. re were Sherlock
Holmes,  hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of Scotl Yard,
a plain-clos man,  myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map
of  county out upon  seat  was busy with hcompasses drawing
a circle with Eyford for its centre.

“re you are,” said he. “That circle drawn at a radius of ten
miles from  village.  place we want must be somewhere near that
line. You said ten miles, think, sir.”

“It was an hour’s good drive.”

“ you think that y brought you back all that way when you were
unconscious?”

“y must have done so. have a confused memory, too, of having been
lifted  conveyed somewhere.”

“What cannot underst,” said I, “why y should have spared you
when y found you lying fainting in  garden. Perhaps  villain
was softened by  woman’s entreaties.”

“hardly think that likely. never saw a more inexorable face in my
life.”

“Oh, we shall soon clear up all that,” said Bradstreet. “Well, have
drawn my circle,  only wish knew at what point upon it  folk
that we are in search of are be found.”

“think could lay my finger on it,” said Holmes quietly.

“Really, now!” cried  inspector, “you have formed your opinion!
Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. say it south, for 
country more deserted re.”

“ say east,” said my patient.

“am for west,” remarked  plain-clos man. “re are several
quiet little villages up re.”

“ am for north,” said I, “because re are no hills re, 
our friend says that he did not notice  carriage go up any.”

“Come,” cried  inspector, laughing; “it’s a very pretty diversity of
opinion. We have boxed  compass among us. Who do you give your
casting vote to?”

“You are all wrong.”

“But we can’t all be.”

“Oh, yes, you can. Thmy point.” He placed hfinger in 
centre of  circle. “Thwhere we shall find m.”

“But  twelve-mile drive?” gasped Harley.

“Six out  six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that  horse
was fresh  glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had
gone twelve miles over heavy roads?”

“Indeed, it a likely ruse enough,” observed Bradstreet thoughtfully.
“Of course re can be no doubt as  nature of thgang.”

“None at all,” said Holmes. “y are coiners on a large scale, 
have used  machine form  amalgam which has taken  place of
silver.”

“We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,” said 
inspector. “y have been turning out half-crowns by  thous. We
even traced m as far as Reading, but could get no farr, for y
had covered ir traces in a way that showed that y were very old
hs. But now, thanks thlucky chance, think that we have got
m right enough.”

But  inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destined
fall in hs of justice. As we rolled inEyford Station we
saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a small
clump of trees in  neighbourhood  hung like an immense ostrich
fear over  lscape.

“A house on fire?” asked Bradstreet as  train steamed off again on
its way.

“Yes, sir!” said  station-master.

“When did it break out?”

“hear that it was during  night, sir, but it has got worse, 
 whole place in a blaze.”

“Whose house it?”

“Dr. Becher’s.”

“Tell me,” broke in  engineer, “Dr. Becher a German, very thin,
with a long, sharp nose?”

 station-master laughed heartily. “No, sir, Dr. Becher an
Englishman,  re isn’t a man in  parish who has a better-lined
waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I
underst, who a foreigner,  he looks as if a little good
Berkshire beef would do him no harm.”

 station-master had not finished hspeech before we were all
hastening in  direction of  fire.  road topped a low hill, 
re was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us,
spouting fire at every chink  window, while in  garden in front
three fire-engines were vainly striving keep  flames under.

“That’s it!” cried Harley, in intense excitement. “re 
gravel-drive,  re are  rose-bushes where lay. That second
window  one that jumped from.”

“Well, at least,” said Holmes, “you have had your revenge upon m.
re can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was
crushed in  press, set fire  wooden walls, though no doubt
y were too excited in  chase after you observe it at  time.
Now keep your eyes open in thcrowd for your friends of last night,
though very much fear that y are a good hundred miles off by now.”

 Holmes’ fears came be realised, for from that day thno
word has ever been heard eir of  beautiful woman,  sinister
German, or  morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had met
a cart containing several people  some very bulky boxes driving
rapidly in  direction of Reading, but re all traces of 
fugitives disappeared,  even Holmes’ ingenuity failed ever to
discover  least clue as ir whereabouts.

 firemen had been much perturbed at  strange arrangements which
y had found within,  still more so by discovering a newly severed
human thumb upon a window-sill of  second floor. About sunset,
however, ir efforts were at last successful,  y subdued 
flames, but not before  roof had fallen in,   whole place been
reduced such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders 
iron piping, not a trace remained of  machinery which had cost our
unfortunate acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel  of tin
were discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were be found,
which may have explained  presence of those bulky boxes which have
been already referred to.

How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from  garden 
spot where he recovered hsenses might have remained forever a
mystery were it not for  soft mould, which told us a very plain
tale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom
had remarkably small feet   or unusually large ones. On 
whole, it was most probable that  silent Englishman, being less bold
or less murderous than hcompanion, had assisted  woman bear
 unconscious man out of  way of danger.

“Well,” said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats return once
more London, “it has been a pretty business for me! have lost my
thumb  have lost a fifty-guinea fee,  what have gained?”

“Experience,” said Holmes, laughing. “Indirectly it may be of value,
you know; you have only put it inwords gain  reputation of
being excellent company for  remainder of your existence.”



X.  ADVENTURE OF  NOBLE BACHELOR

 Lord St. Simon marriage,  its curious termination, have long
ceased be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in which
 unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scals have eclipsed it, 
ir more piquant details have drawn  gossips away from this
four-year-old drama. As have reason believe, however, that 
full facts have never been revealed  general public,  as my
friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing  matter
up, feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some little
sketch of thremarkable episode.

It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during  days when was
still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home from
an afternoon stroll find a letter on  table waiting for him. I
had remained indoors all day, for  wear had taken a sudden turn
rain, with high autumnal winds,   jezail bullet which had
brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaign
throbbed with dull persistence. With my body in one easy-chair  my
legs upon anor, had surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers
until at last, saturated with  news of  day, tossed m all
aside  lay listless, watching  huge crest  monogram upon 
envelope upon  table  wondering lazily who my friend’s noble
correspondent could be.

“Here a very fashionable epistle,” remarked as he entered. “Your
morning letters, if remember right, were from a fish-monger  a
tide-waiter.”

“Yes, my correspondence has certainly  charm of variety,” he
answered, smiling, “  humbler are usually  more interesting.
Thlooks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upon
a man eir be bored or lie.”

He broke  seal  glanced over  contents.

“Oh, come, it may prove be something of interest, after all.”

“Not social, n?”

“No, distinctly professional.”

“ from a noble client?”

“One of  highest in Engl.”

“My dear fellow, congratulate you.”

“assure you, Watson, without affectation, that  status of my
client a matter of less moment me than  interest of hcase.
It just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in this
new investigation. You have been reading  papers diligently of late,
have you not?”

“It looks like it,” said ruefully, pointing a huge bundle in 
corner. “have had nothing else do.”

“It fortunate, for you will perhaps be able post me up. read
nothing except  criminal news   agony column.  latter is
always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely
you must have read about Lord St. Simon  hwedding?”

“Oh, yes, with  deepest interest.”

“That well.  letter which hold in my h from Lord St.
Simon. will read it you,  in return you must turn over se
papers  let me have whatever bears upon  matter. Thwhat he
says:

    “‘MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—Lord Backwater tells me that may
    place implicit reliance upon your judgment  discretion. have
    determined, refore, call upon you  consult you in
    reference  very painful event which has occurred in
    connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotl Yard, is
    acting already in  matter, but he assures me that he sees no
    objection your co-operation,  that he even thinks that it
    might be of some assistance. will call at four o’clock in 
    afternoon, , should you have any or engagement at that time,
    hope that you will postpone it, as thmatter of paramount
    importance. Yours faithfully,


    “‘ROBERT ST. SIMON.’


“It dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen,  
noble lord has had  misfortune get a smear of ink upon  outer
side of hright little finger,” remarked Holmes as he folded up 
epistle.

“He says four o’clock. It three now. He will be here in an hour.”

“n have just time, with your assistance, get clear upon 
subject. Turn over those papers  arrange  extracts in ir order
of time, while take a glance as who our client is.” He picked a
red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside 
mantelpiece. “Here he is,” said he, sitting down  flattening it out
upon hknee. “‘Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second son
of  Duke of Balmoral.’ Hum! ‘Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chief
over a fess sable. Born in 1846.’ He’s forty-one years of age, which is
mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for  colonies in a late
administration.  Duke, hfar, was at one time Secretary for
Foreign Affairs. y inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, 
Tudor on  distaff side. Ha! Well, re nothing very instructive
in all this. think that must turn you Watson, for something more
solid.”

“have very little difficulty in finding what want,” said I, “for
 facts are quite recent,   matter struck me as remarkable. I
feared refer m you, however, as knew that you had an inquiry
on h  that you disliked  intrusion of or matters.”

“Oh, you mean  little problem of  Grosvenor Square furniture van.
That quite cleared up now—though, indeed, it was obvious from 
first. Pray give me  results of your newspaper selections.”

“Here  first notice which can find. It in  personal
column of  _Morning Post_,  dates, as you see, some weeks back:
‘A marriage has been arranged,’ it says, ‘ will, if rumour is
correct, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, second
son of  Duke of Balmoral,  Miss Hatty Doran,  only daughter of
Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That all.”

“Terse   point,” remarked Holmes, stretching hlong, thin
legs towards  fire.

“re was a paragraph amplifying thin one of  society papers of
 same week. Ah, here it is: ‘re will soon be a call for
protection in  marriage  market, for  present free-trade
principle appears tell heavily against our home product. One by one
 management of  noble houses of Great Britain passing in
hs of our fair cousins from across  Atlantic. An important
addition has been made during  last week  list of  prizes
which have been borne away by se charming invaders. Lord St. Simon,
who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against  little
god’s arrows, has now definitely announced happroaching marriage
with Miss Hatty Doran,  fascinating daughter of a California
millionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure  striking face
attracted much attention at  Westbury House festivities, an only
child,  it currently reported that her dowry will run to
considerably over  six figures, with expectancies for  future. As
it an open secret that  Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to
sell hpictures within  last few years,  as Lord St. Simon has
no property of hown save  small estate of Birchmoor, it is
obvious that  Californian heiress not  only gainer by an
alliance which will enable her make  easy  common transition
from a Republican lady a British peeress.’”

“Anything else?” asked Holmes, yawning.

“Oh, yes; plenty. n re anor note in  _Morning Post_ to
say that  marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would
be at St. George’s, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimate
friends would be invited,  that  party would return 
furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius
Doran. Two days later—that is, on Wednesday last—re a curt
announcement that  wedding had taken place,  that  honeymoon
would be passed at Lord Backwater’s place, near Petersfield. Those are
all  notices which appeared before  disappearance of  bride.”

“Before  what?” asked Holmes with a start.

“ vanishing of  lady.”

“When did she vanish, n?”

“At  wedding breakfast.”

“Indeed. Thmore interesting than it promised be; quite
dramatic, in fact.”

“Yes; it struck me as being a little out of  common.”

“y often vanish before  ceremony,  occasionally during 
honeymoon; but cannot call mind anything quite so prompt as this.
Pray let me have  details.”

“warn you that y are very incomplete.”

“Perhaps we may make m less so.”

“Such as y are, y are set forth in a single article of a morning
paper of yesterday, which will read you. It headed, ‘Singular
Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding’:

“‘ family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown in greatest
consternation by  strange  painful episodes which have taken
place in connection with hwedding.  ceremony, as shortly
announced in  papers of yesterday, occurred on  previous morning;
but it only now that it has been possible confirm  strange
rumours which have been so persistently floating about. In spite of 
attempts of  friends hush  matter up, so much public attention
has now been drawn it that no good purpose can be served by
affecting disregard what a common subject for conversation.

“‘ ceremony, which was performed at St. George’s, Hanover Square,
was a very quiet one, no one being present save  far of 
bride, Mr. Aloysius Doran,  Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,
Lord Eustace  Lady Clara St. Simon ( younger bror  sister
of  bridegroom),  Lady Alicia Whittington.  whole party
proceeded afterwards  house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster
Gate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some little
trouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained, who
endeavoured force her way in house after  bridal party,
alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was only after
a painful  prolonged scene that she was ejected by  butler 
 footman.  bride, who had fortunately entered  house before
thunpleasant interruption, had sat down breakfast with  rest,
when she complained of a sudden indisposition  retired her room.
Her prolonged absence having caused some comment, her far followed
her, but learned from her maid that she had only come up her chamber
for an instant, caught up an ulster  bonnet,  hurried down 
passage. One of  footmen declared that he had seen a lady leave 
house thus apparelled, but had refused credit that it was his
mistress, believing her be with  company. On ascertaining that
hdaughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction with
 bridegroom, instantly put mselves in communication with 
police,  very energetic inquiries are being made, which will
probably result in a speedy clearing up of thvery singular business.
Up a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as 
whereabouts of  missing lady. re are rumours of foul play in 
matter,  it said that  police have caused  arrest of 
woman who had caused  original disturbance, in  belief that, from
jealousy or some or motive, she may have been concerned in 
strange disappearance of  bride.’”

“ that all?”

“Only one little item in anor of  morning papers, but it a
suggestive one.”

“ it is—”

“That Miss Flora Millar,  lady who had caused  disturbance, has
actually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a _danseuse_
at  Allegro,  that she has known  bridegroom for some years.
re are no furr particulars,   whole case in your hs
now—so far as it has been set forth in  public press.”

“ an exceedingly interesting case it appears be. would not have
missed it for worlds. But re a ring at  bell, Watson,  as
 clock makes it a few minutes after four, have no doubt that this
will prove be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for I
very much prefer having a witness, if only as a check my own
memory.”

“Lord Robert St. Simon,” announced our page-boy, throwing open 
door. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosed
 pale, with something perhaps of petulance about  mouth,  with
 steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it had ever
been comm  be obeyed. Hmanner was brisk,  yet his
general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had a slight
forward stoop  a little bend of  knees as he walked. Hhair,
too, as he swept off hvery curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round 
edges  thin upon  top. As hdress, it was careful 
verge of foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white
waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-lear shoes,  light-coloured
gaiters. He advanced slowly in room, turning hhead from left
right,  swinging in hright h  cord which held hgolden
eyeglasses.

“Good-day, Lord St. Simon,” said Holmes, rising  bowing. “Pray take
 basket-chair. Thmy friend  colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw up
a little  fire,  we will talk thmatter over.”

“A most painful matter me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.
Holmes. have been cut  quick. underst that you have
already managed several delicate cases of thsort, sir, though I
presume that y were hardly from  same class of society.”

“No, am descending.”

“beg pardon.”

“My last client of  sort was a king.”

“Oh, really! had no idea.  which king?”

“ King of Scinavia.”

“What! Had he lost hwife?”

“You can underst,” said Holmes suavely, “that extend 
affairs of my or clients  same secrecy which promise you in
yours.”

“Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure beg pardon. As my own
case, am ready give you any information which may assist you in
forming an opinion.”

“Thank you. have already learned all that in  public prints,
nothing more. presume that may take it as correct—tharticle, for
example, as  disappearance of  bride.”

Lord St. Simon glanced over it. “Yes, it correct, as far as it
goes.”

“But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer
an opinion. think that may arrive at my facts most directly by
questioning you.”

“Pray do so.”

“When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?”

“In San Francisco, a year ago.”

“You were travelling in  States?”

“Yes.”

“Did you become engaged n?”

“No.”

“But you were on a friendly footing?”

“was amused by her society,  she could see that was amused.”

“Her far very rich?”

“He said be  richest man on  Pacific slope.”

“ how did he make hmoney?”

“In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. n he struck gold,
invested it,  came up by leaps  bounds.”

“Now, what your own impression as  young lady’s—your wife’s
character?”

 nobleman swung hglasses a little faster  stared down in
fire. “You see, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “my wife was twenty before her
far became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a mining
camp  wered through woods or mountains, so that her education has
come from Nature rar than from  schoolmaster. She what we call
in Engl a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild  free, unfettered by
any sort of traditions. She impetuous—volcanic, was about say.
She swift in making up her mind  fearless in carrying out her
resolutions. On  or h, would not have given her  name
which have  honour bear”—he gave a little stately cough—“had I
not thought her be at bottom a noble woman. believe that she is
capable of heroic self-sacrifice  that anything dishonourable would
be repugnant her.”

“Have you her photograph?”

“brought thwith me.” He opened a locket  showed us  full
face of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an ivory
miniature,   artist had brought out  full effect of 
lustrous black hair,  large dark eyes,   exquisite mouth.
Holmes gazed long  earnestly at it. n he closed  locket 
hed it back Lord St. Simon.

“ young lady came London, n,  you renewed your
acquaintance?”

“Yes, her far brought her over for thlast London season. met
her several times, became engaged her,  have now married her.”

“She brought, underst, a considerable dowry?”

“A fair dowry. Not more than usual in my family.”

“ this, of course, remains you, since  marriage a _fait
accompli_?”

“really have made no inquiries on  subject.”

“Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on  day before 
wedding?”

“Yes.”

“Was she in good spirits?”

“Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our future
lives.”

“Indeed! That very interesting.  on  morning of  wedding?”

“She was as bright as possible—at least until after  ceremony.”

“ did you observe any change in her n?”

“Well, tell  truth, saw n  first signs that had ever
seen that her temper was just a little sharp.  incident however, was
too trivial relate  can have no possible bearing upon  case.”

“Pray let us have it, for all that.”

“Oh, it childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards 
vestry. She was passing  front pew at  time,  it fell over
in pew. re was a moment’s delay, but  gentleman in  pew
hed it up her again,  it did not appear be  worse for
 fall. Yet when spoke her of  matter, she answered me
abruptly;  in  carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdly
agitated over thtrifling cause.”

“Indeed! You say that re was a gentleman in  pew. Some of 
general public were present, n?”

“Oh, yes. It impossible exclude m when  church open.”

“Thgentleman was not one of your wife’s friends?”

“No, no; call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite a
common-looking person. hardly noticed happearance. But really I
think that we are wering rar far from  point.”

“Lady St. Simon, n, returned from  wedding in a less cheerful
frame of mind than she had gone it. What did she do on re-entering
her far’s house?”

“saw her in conversation with her maid.”

“ who her maid?”

“Alice her name. She an American  came from California with
her.”

“A confidential servant?”

“A little too much so. It seemed me that her mistress allowed her to
take great liberties. Still, of course, in America y look upon se
things in a different way.”

“How long did she speak thAlice?”

“Oh, a few minutes. had something else think of.”

“You did not overhear what y said?”

“Lady St. Simon said something about ‘jumping a claim.’ She was
accustomed use slang of  kind. have no idea what she meant.”

“American slang very expressive sometimes.  what did your wife do
when she finished speaking her maid?”

“She walked in breakfast-room.”

“On your arm?”

“No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that. n,
after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly,
muttered some words of apology,  left  room. She never came
back.”

“But thmaid, Alice, as underst, deposes that she went her
room, covered her bride’s dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,
 went out.”

“Quite so.  she was afterwards seen walking inHyde Park in
company with Flora Millar, a woman who now in custody,  who had
already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran’s house that morning.”

“Ah, yes. should like a few particulars as thyoung lady, 
your relations her.”

Lord St. Simon shrugged hshoulders  raised heyebrows. “We have
been on a friendly footing for some years—may say on a _very_
friendly footing. She used be at  Allegro. have not treated her
ungenerously,  she had no just cause of complaint against me, but
you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing, but
exceedingly hot-headed  devotedly attached me. She wrote me
dreadful letters when she heard that was about be married, , to
tell  truth,  reason why had  marriage celebrated so quietly
was that feared lest re might be a scal in  church. She came
Mr. Doran’s door just after we returned,  she endeavoured push
her way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife,  even
threatening her, but had foreseen  possibility of something of 
sort,  had two police fellows re in private clos, who soon
pushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that re was no good
in making a row.”

“Did your wife hear all this?”

“No, thank goodness, she did not.”

“ she was seen walking with thvery woman afterwards?”

“Yes. That what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotl Yard, looks upon as so
serious. It thought that Flora decoyed my wife out  laid some
terrible trap for her.”

“Well, it a possible supposition.”

“You think so, too?”

“did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon this
as likely?”

“do not think Flora would hurt a fly.”

“Still, jealousy a strange transformer of characters. Pray what is
your own ory as what took place?”

“Well, really, came seek a ory, not propound one. have
given you all  facts. Since you ask me, however, may say that it
has occurred me as possible that  excitement of thaffair, 
consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had 
effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife.”

“In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?”

“Well, really, when consider that she has turned her back—will not
say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired without
success—can hardly explain it in any or fashion.”

“Well, certainly that also a conceivable hyposis,” said Holmes,
smiling. “ now, Lord St. Simon, think that have nearly all my
data. May ask wher you were seated at  breakfast-table so that
you could see out of  window?”

“We could see  or side of  road   Park.”

“Quite so. n do not think that need detain you longer. I
shall communicate with you.”

“Should you be fortunate enough solve thproblem,” said our
client, rising.

“have solved it.”

“Eh? What was that?”

“say that have solved it.”

“Where, n, my wife?”

“That a detail which shall speedily supply.”

Lord St. Simon shook hhead. “am afraid that it will take wiser
heads than yours or mine,” he remarked,  bowing in a stately,
old-fashioned manner he departed.

“It very good of Lord St. Simon honour my head by putting it on a
level with hown,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “think that I
shall have a whisky  soda  a cigar after all this
cross-questioning. had formed my conclusions as  case before
our client came in room.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“have notes of several similar cases, though none, as remarked
before, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served turn
my conjecture ina certainty. Circumstantial evidence occasionally
very convincing, as when you find a trout in  milk, quote
Thoreau’s example.”

“But have heard all that you have heard.”

“Without, however,  knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves me
so well. re was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back, 
something on very much  same lines at Munich  year after 
Franco-Prussian War. It one of se cases—but, hullo, here is
Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler upon
 sideboard,  re are cigars in  box.”

 official detective was attired in a pea-jacket  cravat, which
gave him a decidedly nautical appearance,  he carried a black canvas
bag in hh. With a short greeting he seated himself  lit 
cigar which had been offered him.

“What’s up, n?” asked Holmes with a twinkle in heye. “You look
dissatisfied.”

“ feel dissatisfied. It thinfernal St. Simon marriage case.
can make neir head nor tail of  business.”

“Really! You surprise me.”

“Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems slip
through my fingers. have been at work upon it all day.”

“ very wet it seems have made you,” said Holmes laying hh
upon  arm of  pea-jacket.

“Yes, have been dragging  Serpentine.”

“In Heaven’s name, what for?”

“In search of  body of Lady St. Simon.”

Sherlock Holmes leaned back in hchair  laughed heartily.

“Have you dragged  basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?” he asked.

“Why? What do you mean?”

“Because you have just as good a chance of finding thlady in  one
as in  or.”

Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. “suppose you know all
about it,” he snarled.

“Well, have only just heard  facts, but my mind made up.”

“Oh, indeed! n you think that  Serpentine plays no part in 
matter?”

“think it very unlikely.”

“n perhaps you will kindly explain how it that we found thin
it?” He opened hbag as he spoke,  tumbled on floor a
wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes  a
bride’s wreath  veil, all discoloured  soaked in water. “re,”
said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon  top of  pile. “re is
a little nut for you crack, Master Holmes.”

“Oh, indeed!” said my friend, blowing blue rings in air. “You
dragged m from  Serpentine?”

“No. y were found floating near  margin by a park-keeper. y
have been identified as her clos,  it seemed me that if 
clos were re  body would not be far off.”

“By  same brilliant reasoning, every man’s body be found in
 neighbourhood of hwardrobe.  pray what did you hope arrive
at through this?”

“At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in  disappearance.”

“am afraid that you will find it difficult.”

“Are you, indeed, now?” cried Lestrade with some bitterness. “am
afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductions
 your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes.
Thdress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.”

“ how?”

“In  dress a pocket. In  pocket a card-case. In 
card-case a note.  here  very note.” He slapped it down
upon  table in front of him. “Listen this: ‘You will see me when
all ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my ory all along has been
that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar,  that she,
with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance.
Here, signed with her initials,  very note which was no doubt
quietly slipped inher h at  door  which lured her within
ir reach.”

“Very good, Lestrade,” said Holmes, laughing. “You really are very fine
indeed. Let me see it.” He took up  paper in a listless way, but his
attention instantly became riveted,  he gave a little cry of
satisfaction. “Thindeed important,” said he.

“Ha! you find it so?”

“Extremely so. congratulate you warmly.”

Lestrade rose in htriumph  bent hhead look. “Why,” he
shrieked, “you’re looking at  wrong side!”

“On  contrary, th right side.”

“ right side? You’re mad! Here  note written in pencil over
here.”

“ over here what appears be  fragment of a hotel bill,
which interests me deeply.”

“re’s nothing in it. looked at it before,” said Lestrade. “‘Oct.
4th, rooms 8_s_., breakfast 2_s_. 6_d_., cocktail 1_s_., lunch 2_s_.
6_d_., glass sherry, 8_d_.’ see nothing in that.”

“Very likely not. It most important, all  same. As  note,
it important also, or at least  initials are, so congratulate
you again.”

“I’ve wasted time enough,” said Lestrade, rising. “believe in hard
work  not in sitting by  fire spinning fine ories. Good-day,
Mr. Holmes,  we shall see which gets  bottom of  matter
first.” He gared up  garments, thrust m in bag,  made
for  door.

“Just one hint you, Lestrade,” drawled Holmes before hrival
vanished; “will tell you  true solution of  matter. Lady St.
Simon a myth. re not,  re never has been, any such
person.”

Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. n he turned me, tapped his
forehead three times, shook hhead solemnly,  hurried away.

He had hardly shut  door behind him when Holmes rose put on his
overcoat. “re something in what  fellow says about outdoor
work,” he remarked, “so think, Watson, that must leave you your
papers for a little.”

It was after five o’clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but had no
time be lonely, for within an hour re arrived a confectioner’s
man with a very large flat box. Thhe unpacked with  help of a
youth whom he had brought with him,  presently, my very great
astonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began be laid out
upon our humble lodging-house mahogany. re were a couple of brace of
cold woodcock, a pheasant, a _pâté de foie gras_ pie with a group of
ancient  cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all se luxuries, my
two visitors vanished away, like  geniof  Arabian Nights, with
no explanation save that  things had been paid for  were ordered
thaddress.

Just before nine o’clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly in room.
Hfeatures were gravely set, but re was a light in heye which
made me think that he had not been disappointed in hconclusions.

“y have laid  supper, n,” he said, rubbing hhs.

“You seem expect company. y have laid for five.”

“Yes, fancy we may have some company dropping in,” said he. “am
surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! fancy that
hear hstep now upon  stairs.”

It was indeed our visitor of  afternoon who came bustling in,
dangling hglasses more vigorously than ever,  with a very
perturbed expression upon haristocratic features.

“My messenger reached you, n?” asked Holmes.

“Yes,  confess that  contents startled me beyond measure. Have
you good authority for what you say?”

“ best possible.”

Lord St. Simon sank ina chair  passed hh over hforehead.

“What will  Duke say,” he murmured, “when he hears that one of 
family has been subjected such humiliation?”

“It  purest accident. cannot allow that re any
humiliation.”

“Ah, you look on se things from anor stpoint.”

“fail see that anyone blame. can hardly see how  lady
could have acted orwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was
undoubtedly be regretted. Having no mor, she had no one advise
her at such a crisis.”

“It was a slight, sir, a public slight,” said Lord St. Simon, tapping
hfingers upon  table.

“You must make allowance for thpoor girl, placed in so unprecedented
a position.”

“will make no allowance. am very angry indeed,  have been
shamefully used.”

“think that heard a ring,” said Holmes. “Yes, re are steps on
 ling. If cannot persuade you take a lenient view of 
matter, Lord St. Simon, have brought an advocate here who may be more
successful.” He opened  door  ushered in a lady  gentleman.
“Lord St. Simon,” said he “allow me introduce you Mr.  Mrs.
FrancHay Moulton.  lady, think, you have already met.”

At  sight of se newcomers our client had sprung from hseat 
stood very erect, with heyes cast down  hh thrust in
breast of hfrock-coat, a picture of offended dignity.  lady had
taken a quick step forward  had held out her h him, but he
still refused raise heyes. It was as well for hresolution,
perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard resist.

“You’re angry, Robert,” said she. “Well, guess you have every cause
be.”

“Pray make no apology me,” said Lord St. Simon bitterly.

“Oh, yes, know that have treated you real bad  that should
have spoken you before went; but was kind of rattled,  from
 time when saw Frank here again just didn’t know what was
doing or saying. only wonder didn’t fall down  do a faint right
re before  altar.”

“Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend  me leave 
room while you explain thmatter?”

“If may give an opinion,” remarked  strange gentleman, “we’ve had
just a little too much secrecy over thbusiness already. For my part,
should like all Europe  America hear  rights of it.” He was
a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face  alert
manner.

“n I’ll tell our story right away,” said  lady. “Frank here  I
met in ’84, in McQuire’s camp, near  Rockies, where Pa was working a
claim. We were engaged each or, Frank  I; but n one day
far struck a rich pocket  made a pile, while poor Frank here had
a claim that petered out  came nothing.  richer Pa grew 
poorer was Frank; so at last Pa wouldn’t hear of our engagement lasting
any longer,  he took me away ’Frisco. Frank wouldn’t throw up his
h, though; so he followed me re,  he saw me without Pa knowing
anything about it. It would only have made him mad know, so we just
fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go  make his
pile, too,  never come back claim me until he had as much as Pa.
So n promised wait for him  end of time  pledged
myself not marry anyone else while he lived. ‘Why shouldn’t we be
married right away, n,’ said he, ‘ n will feel sure of you;
 won’t claim be your husb until come back?’ Well, we
talked it over,  he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a clergyman
all ready in waiting, that we just did it right re;  n Frank
went off seek hfortune,  went back Pa.

“ next heard of Frank was that he was in Montana,  n he went
prospecting in Arizona,  n heard of him from New Mexico. After
that came a long newspaper story about how a miners’ camp had been
attacked by Apache Indians,  re was my Frank’s name among 
killed. fainted dead away,  was very sick for months after. Pa
thought had a decline  took me half  doctors in ’Frisco. Not
a word of news came for a year  more, so that never doubted that
Frank was really dead. n Lord St. Simon came ’Frisco,  we came
London,  a marriage was arranged,  Pa was very pleased, but I
felt all  time that no man on thearth would ever take  place
in my heart that had been given my poor Frank.

“Still, if had married Lord St. Simon, of course I’d have done my
duty by him. We can’t comm our love, but we can our actions. went
 altar with him with  intention make him just as good a
wife as it was in me be. But you may imagine what felt when, just
as came  altar rails, glanced back  saw Frank sting 
looking at me out of  first pew. thought it was hghost at
first; but when looked again re he was still, with a kind of
question in heyes, as if ask me wher were glad or sorry to
see him. wonder didn’t drop. know that everything was turning
round,   words of  clergyman were just like  buzz of a bee
in my ear. didn’t know what do. Should stop  service  make
a scene in  church? glanced at him again,  he seemed know
what was thinking, for he raised hfinger hlips tell me to
be still. n saw him scribble on a piece of paper,  knew that
he was writing me a note. As passed hpew on  way out dropped
my bouquet over him,  he slipped  note inmy h when he
returned me  flowers. It was only a line asking me join him when
he made  sign me do so. Of course never doubted for a moment
that my first duty was now him,  determined do just whatever
he might direct.

“When got back told my maid, who had known him in California, 
had always been hfriend. ordered her say nothing, but get a
few things packed  my ulster ready. know ought have spoken to
Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before hmor  all
those great people. just made up my mind run away  explain
afterwards. hadn’t been at  table ten minutes before saw Frank
out of  window at  or side of  road. He beckoned me 
n began walking in Park. slipped out, put on my things, 
followed him. Some woman came talking something or or about Lord St.
Simon me—seemed me from  little heard as if he had a little
secret of hown before marriage also—but managed get away from
her  soon overtook Frank. We got ina cab toger,  away we
drove some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square,  that was my
true wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been a
prisoner among  Apaches, had escaped, came on ’Frisco, found that
had given him up for dead  had gone Engl, followed me re,
 had come upon me at last on  very morning of my second wedding.”

“saw it in a paper,” explained  American. “It gave  name 
 church but not where  lady lived.”

“n we had a talk as what we should do,  Frank was all for
openness, but was so ashamed of it all that felt as if should
like vanish away  never see any of m again—just sending a line
Pa, perhaps, show him that was alive. It was awful me to
think of all those lords  ladies sitting round that breakfast-table
 waiting for me come back. So Frank took my wedding-clos 
things  made a bundle of m, so that should not be traced, 
dropped m away somewhere where no one could find m. It likely
that we should have gone on Parto-morrow, only that thgood
gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round us thevening, though how he
found us more than can think,  he showed us very clearly 
kindly that was wrong  that Frank was right,  that we should be
putting ourselves in  wrong if we were so secret. n he offered to
give us a chance of talking Lord St. Simon alone,  so we came
right away round hrooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard it
all,  am very sorry if have given you pain,  hope that you
do not think very meanly of me.”

Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed hrigid attitude, but had
listened with a frowning brow  a compressed lip thlong
narrative.

“Excuse me,” he said, “but it not my custom discuss my most
intimate personal affairs in thpublic manner.”

“n you won’t forgive me? You won’t shake hs before go?”

“Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure.” He put out hh
 coldly grasped that which she extended him.

“had hoped,” suggested Holmes, “that you would have joined us in a
friendly supper.”

“think that re you ask a little too much,” responded hLordship.
“may be forced acquiesce in se recent developments, but can
hardly be expected make merry over m. think that with your
permission will now wish you all a very good-night.” He included us
all in a sweeping bow  stalked out of  room.

“n trust that you at least will honour me with your company,” said
Sherlock Holmes. “It always a joy meet an American, Mr. Moulton,
for am one of those who believe that  folly of a monarch  
blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent our
children from being some day citizens of  same world-wide country
under a flag which shall be a quartering of  Union Jack with 
Stars  Stripes.”

“ case has been an interesting one,” remarked Holmes when our
visitors had left us, “because it serves show very clearly how
simple  explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seems
be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than 
sequence of events as narrated by thlady,  nothing stranger than
 result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scotl
Yard.”

“You were not yourself at fault at all, n?”

“From  first, two facts were very obvious me,  one that 
lady had been quite willing undergo  wedding ceremony,  or
that she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home.
Obviously something had occurred during  morning, n, cause her
change her mind. What could that something be? She could not have
spoken anyone when she was out, for she had been in  company of
 bridegroom. Had she seen someone, n? If she had, it must be
someone from America because she had spent so short a time in this
country that she could hardly have allowed anyone acquire so deep an
influence over her that  mere sight of him would induce her to
change her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by a
process of exclusion, at  idea that she might have seen an American.
n who could thAmerican be,  why should he possess so much
influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husb. Her
young womanhood had, knew, been spent in rough scenes  under
strange conditions. So far had got before ever heard Lord St.
Simon’s narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of  change in
 bride’s manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note as
 dropping of a bouquet, of her resort her confidential maid, 
of her very significant allusion claim-jumping—which in miners’
parlance means taking possession of that which anor person has a
prior claim to— whole situation became absolutely clear. She had
gone off with a man,   man was eir a lover or was a previous
husb— chances being in favour of  latter.”

“ how in  world did you find m?”

“It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information in
hhs  value of which he did not himself know.  initials
were, of course, of  highest importance, but more valuable still was
it know that within a week he had settled hbill at one of 
most select London hotels.”

“How did you deduce  select?”

“By  select prices. Eight shillings for a bed  eightpence for a
glass of sherry pointed one of  most expensive hotels. re are
not many in London which charge at that rate. In  second one which I
visited in Northumberl Avenue, learned by an inspection of 
book that FrancH. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only 
day before,  on looking over  entries against him, came upon
 very items which had seen in  duplicate bill. Hletters were
be forwarded 226 Gordon Square; so thir travelled,  being
fortunate enough find  loving couple at home, ventured give
m some paternal advice  point out m that it would be
better in every way that y should make ir position a little
clearer both  general public  Lord St. Simon in particular.
invited m meet him here, , as you see, made him keep 
appointment.”

“But with no very good result,” remarked. “Hconduct was certainly
not very gracious.”

“Ah, Watson,” said Holmes, smiling, “perhaps you would not be very
gracious eir, if, after all  trouble of wooing  wedding, you
found yourself deprived in an instant of wife  of fortune. think
that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully  thank our stars
that we are never likely find ourselves in  same position. Draw
your chair up  h me my violin, for  only problem we have still
solve how while away se bleak autumnal evenings.”



XI.  ADVENTURE OF  BERYL CORONET

“Holmes,” said as stood one morning in our bow-window looking down
 street, “here a madman coming along. It seems rar sad that
hrelatives should allow him come out alone.”

My friend rose lazily from harmchair  stood with hhs in 
pockets of hdressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was a
bright, crisp February morning,   snow of  day before still
lay deep upon  ground, shimmering brightly in  wintry sun. Down
 centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed ina brown crumbly
b by  traffic, but at eir side  on  heaped-up edges of
 footpaths it still lay as white as when it fell.  grey pavement
had been cleaned  scraped, but was still dangerously slippery, so
that re were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed, from  direction
of  Metropolitan Station no one was coming save  single gentleman
whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.

He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly,  imposing, with a
massive, strongly marked face  a comming figure. He was dressed
in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat
brown gaiters,  well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet hactions were
in absurd contrast  dignity of hdress  features, for he was
running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man gives
who little accustomed set any tax upon hlegs. As he ran he
jerked hhs up  down, waggled hhead,  wrid hface
in most extraordinary contortions.

“What on earth can be  matter with him?” asked. “He looking up
at  numbers of  houses.”

“believe that he coming here,” said Holmes, rubbing hhs.

“Here?”

“Yes; rar think he coming consult me professionally. think
that recognise  symptoms. Ha! did not tell you?” As he spoke,
 man, puffing  blowing, rushed at our door  pulled at our bell
until  whole house resounded with  clanging.

A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still
gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief  despair in his
eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant horror  pity. For
a while he could not get hwords out, but swayed hbody  plucked
at hhair like one who has been driven  extreme limits of his
reason. n, suddenly springing hfeet, he beat hhead against
 wall with such force that we both rushed upon him  tore him away
 centre of  room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down in
easy-chair , sitting beside him, patted hh  chatted with
him in  easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how employ.

“You have come me tell your story, have you not?” said he. “You
are fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered
yourself,  n shall be most happy look inany little
problem which you may submit me.”

 man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting against
hemotion. n he passed hhkerchief over hbrow, set his
lips tight,  turned hface towards us.

“No doubt you think me mad?” said he.

“see that you have had some great trouble,” responded Holmes.

“God knows have!—a trouble which enough unseat my reason, so
sudden  so terrible it. Public disgrace might have faced,
although am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.
Private affliction also  lot of every man; but  two coming
toger,  in so frightful a form, have been enough shake my very
soul. Besides, it not alone.  very noblest in  l may
suffer unless some way be found out of thhorrible affair.”

“Pray compose yourself, sir,” said Holmes, “ let me have a clear
account of who you are  what it that has befallen you.”

“My name,” answered our visitor, “probably familiar your ears. I
am Alexer Holder, of  banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, of
Threadneedle Street.”

 name was indeed well known us as belonging  senior partner
in  second largest private banking concern in  City of London.
What could have happened, n, bring one of  foremost citizens
of London thmost pitiable pass? We waited, all curiosity, until
with anor effort he braced himself tell hstory.

“feel that time of value,” said he; “that why hastened here
when  police inspector suggested that should secure your
co-operation. came Baker Street by  Underground  hurried
from re on foot, for  cabs go slowly through thsnow. That is
why was so out of breath, for am a man who takes very little
exercise. feel better now,  will put  facts before you as
shortly  yet as clearly as can.

“It is, of course, well known you that in a successful banking
business as much depends upon our being able find remunerative
investments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection  
number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying out
money in  shape of loans, where  security unimpeachable. We
have done a good deal in thdirection during  last few years, 
re are many noble families whom we have advanced large sums upon
 security of ir pictures, libraries, or plate.

“Yesterday morning was seated in my office at  bank when a card
was brought in me by one of  clerks. started when saw 
name, for it was that of none or than—well, perhaps even you I
had better say no more than that it was a name which a household
word all over  earth—one of  highest, noblest, most exalted names
in Engl. was overwhelmed by  honour  attempted, when he
entered, say so, but he plunged at once inbusiness with  air
of a man who wishes hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.

“‘Mr. Holder,’ said he, ‘have been informed that you are in  habit
of advancing money.’

“‘ firm does so when  security good.’ answered.

“‘It absolutely essential me,’ said he, ‘that should have £
50,000 at once. could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten times
over from my friends, but much prefer make it a matter of business
 carry out that business myself. In my position you can readily
underst that it unwise place one’s self under obligations.’

“‘For how long, may ask, do you want thsum?’ asked.

“‘Next Monday have a large sum due me,  shall n most
certainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think it
right charge. But it very essential me that  money should
be paid at once.’

“‘should be happy advance it without furr parley from my own
private purse,’ said I, ‘were it not that  strain would be rar
more than it could bear. If, on  or h, am do it in 
name of  firm, n in justice my partner must insist that,
even in your case, every businesslike precaution should be taken.’

“‘should much prefer have it so,’ said he, raising up a square,
black morocco case which he had laid beside hchair. ‘You have
doubtless heard of  Beryl Coronet?’

“‘One of  most precious public possessions of  empire,’ said I.

“‘Precisely.’ He opened  case,  re, imbedded in soft,
flesh-coloured velvet, lay  magnificent piece of jewellery which he
had named. ‘re are thirty-nine enormous beryls,’ said he, ‘ 
price of  gold chasing incalculable.  lowest estimate would
put  worth of  coronet at double  sum which have asked. am
prepared leave it with you as my security.’

“took  precious case inmy hs  looked in some perplexity
from it my illustrious client.

“‘You doubt its value?’ he asked.

“‘Not at all. only doubt—’

“‘ propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about
that. should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain
that should be able in four days reclaim it. It a pure matter
of form.  security sufficient?’

“‘Ample.’

“‘You underst, Mr. Holder, that am giving you a strong proof of
 confidence which have in you, founded upon all that have heard
of you. rely upon you not only be discreet  refrain from all
gossip upon  matter but, above all, preserve thcoronet with
every possible precaution because need not say that a great public
scal would be caused if any harm were befall it. Any injury it
would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for re are no
beryls in  world match se,  it would be impossible to
replace m. leave it with you, however, with every confidence, 
shall call for it in person on Monday morning.’

“Seeing that my client was anxious leave, said no more but,
calling for my cashier, ordered him pay over fifty £ 1000 notes.
When was alone once more, however, with  precious case lying upon
 table in front of me, could not but think with some misgivings of
 immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. re could be no
doubt that, as it was a national possession, a horrible scal would
ensue if any misfortune should occur it. already regretted having
ever consented take charge of it. However, it was too late alter
 matter now, so locked it up in my private safe  turned once
more my work.

“When evening came felt that it would be an imprudence leave so
precious a thing in  office behind me. Bankers’ safes had been
forced before now,  why should not mine be? If so, how terrible
would be  position in which should find myself! determined,
refore, that for  next few days would always carry  case
backward  forward with me, so that it might never be really out of
my reach. With thintention, called a cab  drove out my house
at Streatham, carrying  jewel with me. did not brea freely
until had taken it upstairs  locked it in  bureau of my
dressing-room.

“ now a word as my household, Mr. Holmes, for wish you to
thoroughly underst  situation. My groom  my page sleep out of
 house,  may be set aside altoger. have three maid-servants
who have been with me a number of years  whose absolute reliability
quite above suspicion. Anor, Lucy Parr,  second waiting-maid,
has only been in my service a few months. She came with an excellent
character, however,  has always given me satisfaction. She a very
pretty girl  has attracted admirers who have occasionally hung about
 place. That  only drawback which we have found her, but we
believe her be a thoroughly good girl in every way.

“So much for  servants. My family itself so small that it will
not take me long describe it. am a widower  have an only son,
Arthur. He has been a disappointment me, Mr. Holmes—a grievous
disappointment. have no doubt that am myself blame. People tell
me that have spoiled him. Very likely have. When my dear wife died
felt that he was all had love. could not bear see  smile
fade even for a moment from hface. have never denied him a wish.
Perhaps it would have been better for both of us had been sterner,
but meant it for  best.

“It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in my
business, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, ,
speak  truth, could not trust him in  hling of large sums
of money. When he was young he became a member of an aristocratic club,
 re, having charming manners, he was soon  intimate of a
number of men with long purses  expensive habits. He learned play
heavily at cards  squer money on  turf, until he had again
 again come me  implore me give him an advance upon his
allowance, that he might settle hdebts of honour. He tried more than
once break away from  dangerous company which he was keeping, but
each time  influence of hfriend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough
draw him back again.

“, indeed, could not wonder that such a man as Sir George Burnwell
should gain an influence over him, for he has frequently brought him to
my house,  have found myself that could hardly resist 
fascination of hmanner. He older than Arthur, a man of  world
hfinger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen everything, a
brilliant talker,  a man of great personal beauty. Yet when think
of him in cold blood, far away from  glamour of hpresence, am
convinced from hcynical speech   look which have caught in
heyes that he one who should be deeply distrusted. So think,
 so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a woman’s quick insight
incharacter.

“ now re only she be described. She my niece; but when
my bror died five years ago  left her alone in  world I
adopted her,  have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. She is
a sunbeam in my house—sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful manager 
housekeeper, yet as tender  quiet  gentle as a woman could be.
She my right h. do not know what could do without her. In
only one matter has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice my boy has
asked her marry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each time she
has refused him. think that if anyone could have drawn him in
right path it would have been she,  that hmarriage might have
changed hwhole life; but now, alas! it too late—forever too late!

“Now, Mr. Holmes, you know  people who live under my roof,  I
shall continue with my miserable story.

“When we were taking coffee in  drawing-room that night after
dinner, told Arthur  Mary my experience,  of  precious
treasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only  name of my
client. Lucy Parr, who had brought in  coffee, had, am sure, left
 room; but cannot swear that  door was closed. Mary  Arthur
were much interested  wished see  famous coronet, but I
thought it better not disturb it.

“‘Where have you put it?’ asked Arthur.

“‘In my own bureau.’

“‘Well, hope goodness  house won’t be burgled during 
night.’ said he.

“‘It locked up,’ answered.

“‘Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When was a youngster have
opened it myself with  key of  box-room cupboard.’

“He often had a wild way of talking, so that thought little of what
he said. He followed me my room, however, that night with a very
grave face.

“‘Look here, dad,’ said he with heyes cast down, ‘can you let me
have £ 200?’

“‘No, cannot!’ answered sharply. ‘have been far too generous with
you in money matters.’

“‘You have been very kind,’ said he, ‘but must have thmoney, or
else can never show my face inside  club again.’

“‘ a very good thing, too!’ cried.

“‘Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,’ said he.
‘could not bear  disgrace. must raise  money in some way, 
if you will not let me have it, n must try or means.’

“was very angry, for thwas  third dem during  month. ‘You
shall not have a farthing from me,’ cried, on which he bowed  left
 room without anor word.

“When he was gone unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure was
safe,  locked it again. n started go round  house see
that all was secure—a duty which usually leave Mary but which I
thought it well perform myself that night. As came down  stairs
saw Mary herself at  side window of  hall, which she closed 
fastened as approached.

“‘Tell me, dad,’ said she, looking, thought, a little disturbed, ‘did
you give Lucy,  maid, leave go out to-night?’

“‘Certainly not.’

“‘She came in just now by  back door. have no doubt that she has
only been  side gate see someone, but think that it is
hardly safe  should be stopped.’

“‘You must speak her in  morning, or will if you prefer it. Are
you sure that everything fastened?’

“‘Quite sure, dad.’

“‘n, good-night.’ kissed her  went up my bedroom again,
where was soon asleep.

“am endeavouring tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have
any bearing upon  case, but beg that you will question me upon any
point which do not make clear.”

“On  contrary, your statement singularly lucid.”

“come a part of my story now in which should wish be
particularly so. am not a very heavy sleeper,   anxiety in my
mind tended, no doubt, make me even less so than usual. About two in
 morning, n, was awakened by some sound in  house. It had
ceased ere was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind it as
though a window had gently closed somewhere. lay listening with all
my ears. Suddenly, my horror, re was a distinct sound of
footsteps moving softly in  next room. slipped out of bed, all
palpitating with fear,  peeped round  corner of my dressing-room
door.

“‘Arthur!’ screamed, ‘you villain! you thief! How dare you touch that
coronet?’

“ gas was half up, as had left it,  my unhappy boy, dressed
only in hshirt  trousers, was sting beside  light, holding
 coronet in hhs. He appeared be wrenching at it, or bending
it with all hstrength. At my cry he dropped it from hgrasp 
turned as pale as death. snatched it up  examined it. One of 
gold corners, with three of  beryls in it, was missing.

“‘You blackguard!’ shouted, beside myself with rage. ‘You have
destroyed it! You have dishonoured me forever! Where are  jewels
which you have stolen?’

“‘Stolen!’ he cried.

“‘Yes, thief!’ roared, shaking him by  shoulder.

“‘re are none missing. re cannot be any missing,’ said he.

“‘re are three missing.  you know where y are. Must call you
a liar as well as a thief? Did not see you trying tear off anor
piece?’

“‘You have called me names enough,’ said he, ‘will not st it any
longer. shall not say anor word about thbusiness, since you
have chosen insult me. will leave your house in  morning 
make my own way in  world.’

“‘You shall leave it in  hs of  police!’ cried half-mad with
grief  rage. ‘shall have thmatter probed  bottom.’

“‘You shall learn nothing from me,’ said he with a passion such as I
should not have thought was in hnature. ‘If you choose call 
police, let  police find what y can.’

“By thtime  whole house was astir, for had raised my voice in
my anger. Mary was  first rush inmy room, , at  sight of
 coronet  of Arthur’s face, she read  whole story , with a
scream, fell down senseless on  ground. sent  housemaid for 
police  put  investigation inir hs at once. When 
inspector  a constable entered  house, Arthur, who had stood
sullenly with harms folded, asked me wher it was my intention to
charge him with ft. answered that it had ceased be a private
matter, but had become a public one, since  ruined coronet was
national property. was determined that  law should have its way in
everything.

“‘At least,’ said he, ‘you will not have me arrested at once. It would
be your advantage as well as mine if might leave  house for
five minutes.’

“‘That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you have
stolen,’ said I.  n, realising  dreadful position in which I
was placed, implored him remember that not only my honour but that
of one who was far greater than was at stake;  that he threatened
raise a scal which would convulse  nation. He might avert it
all if he would but tell me what he had done with  three missing
stones.

“‘You may as well face  matter,’ said I; ‘you have been caught in
 act,  no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you
but make such reparation as in your power, by telling us where 
beryls are, all shall be forgiven  forgotten.’

“‘Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turning
away from me with a sneer. saw that he was too hardened for any words
of mine influence him. re was but one way for it. called in 
inspector  gave him incustody. A search was made at once not only
of hperson but of hroom  of every portion of  house where
he could possibly have concealed  gems; but no trace of m could
be found, nor would  wretched boy open hmouth for all our
persuasions  our threats. Thmorning he was removed a cell, 
I, after going through all  police formalities, have hurried round
you implore you use your skill in unravelling  matter. 
police have openly confessed that y can at present make nothing of
it. You may go any expense which you think necessary. have already
offered a reward of £ 1000. My God, what shall do! have lost my
honour, my gems,  my son in one night. Oh, what shall do!”

He put a h on eir side of hhead  rocked himself  fro,
droning himself like a child whose grief has got beyond words.

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with hbrows knitted
 heyes fixed upon  fire.

“Do you receive much company?” he asked.

“None save my partner with hfamily  an occasional friend of
Arthur’s. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately. No one
else, think.”

“Do you go out much in society?”

“Arthur does. Mary  stay at home. We neir of us care for it.”

“That unusual in a young girl.”

“She of a quiet nature. Besides, she not so very young. She is
four--twenty.”

“Thmatter, from what you say, seems have been a shock her
also.”

“Terrible! She even more affected than I.”

“You have neir of you any doubt as your son’s guilt?”

“How can we have when saw him with my own eyes with  coronet in
hhs.”

“hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was  remainder of 
coronet at all injured?”

“Yes, it was twisted.”

“Do you not think, n, that he might have been trying straighten
it?”

“God bless you! You are doing what you can for him  for me. But it
too heavy a task. What was he doing re at all? If hpurpose
were innocent, why did he not say so?”

“Precisely.  if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His
silence appears me cut both ways. re are several singular
points about  case. What did  police think of  noise which
awoke you from your sleep?”

“y considered that it might be caused by Arthur’s closing his
bedroom door.”

“A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam hdoor so as
wake a household. What did y say, n, of  disappearance of
se gems?”

“y are still sounding  planking  probing  furniture in 
hope of finding m.”

“Have y thought of looking outside  house?”

“Yes, y have shown extraordinary energy.  whole garden has
already been minutely examined.”

“Now, my dear sir,” said Holmes, “it not obvious you now that
thmatter really strikes very much deeper than eir you or 
police were at first inclined think? It appeared you be a
simple case; me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is
involved by your ory. You suppose that your son came down from his
bed, went, at great risk, your dressing-room, opened your bureau,
took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it,
went off some or place, concealed three gems out of 
thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find m,  n
returned with  or thirty-six in room in which he exposed
himself  greatest danger of being discovered. ask you now, is
such a ory tenable?”

“But what or re?” cried  banker with a gesture of despair.
“If hmotives were innocent, why does he not explain m?”

“It our task find that out,” replied Holmes; “so now, if you
please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham toger,  devote
an hour glancing a little more closely indetails.”

My friend insisted upon my accompanying m in ir expedition, which
was eager enough do, for my curiosity  sympathy were deeply
stirred by  story which we had listened. confess that  guilt
of  banker’s son appeared me be as obvious as it did his
unhappy far, but still had such faith in Holmes’ judgment that I
felt that re must be some grounds for hope as long as he was
dissatisfied with  accepted explanation. He hardly spoke a word 
whole way out  sourn suburb, but sat with hchin upon his
breast  hhat drawn over heyes, sunk in  deepest thought.
Our client appeared have taken fresh heart at  little glimpse of
hope which had been presented him,  he even broke ina
desultory chat with me over hbusiness affairs. A short railway
journey  a shorter walk brought us Fairbank,  modest residence
of  great financier.

Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, sting back a
little from  road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn,
stretched down in front two large iron gates which closed 
entrance. On  right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into
a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from  road 
kitchen door,  forming  tradesmen’s entrance. On  left ran a
lane which led  stables,  was not itself within  grounds at
all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left us
sting at  door  walked slowly all round  house, across 
front, down  tradesmen’s path,  so round by  garden behind
in stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder  went into
 dining-room  waited by  fire until he should return. We were
sitting re in silence when  door opened  a young lady came in.
She was rar above  middle height, slim, with dark hair  eyes,
which seemed  darker against  absolute pallor of her skin. do
not think that have ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman’s face.
Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying.
As she swept silently in room she impressed me with a greater
sense of grief than  banker had done in  morning,  it was 
more striking in her as she was evidently a woman of strong character,
with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she
went straight her uncle  passed her h over hhead with a
sweet womanly caress.

“You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not,
dad?” she asked.

“No, no, my girl,  matter must be probed  bottom.”

“But am so sure that he innocent. You know what woman’s instincts
are. know that he has done no harm  that you will be sorry for
having acted so harshly.”

“Why he silent, n, if he innocent?”

“Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspect
him.”

“How could help suspecting him, when actually saw him with 
coronet in hh?”

“Oh, but he had only picked it up look at it. Oh, do, do take my
word for it that he innocent. Let  matter drop  say no more.
It so dreadful think of our dear Arthur in prison!”

“shall never let it drop until  gems are found—never, Mary! Your
affection for Arthur blinds you as  awful consequences me. Far
from hushing  thing up, have brought a gentleman down from London
inquire more deeply init.”

“Thgentleman?” she asked, facing round me.

“No, hfriend. He wished us leave him alone. He round in 
stable lane now.”

“ stable lane?” She raised her dark eyebrows. “What can he hope to
find re? Ah! this, suppose, he. trust, sir, that you will
succeed in proving, what feel sure  truth, that my cousin
Arthur innocent of thcrime.”

“fully share your opinion,  trust, with you, that we may prove
it,” returned Holmes, going back  mat knock  snow from his
shoes. “believe have  honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder.
Might ask you a question or two?”

“Pray do, sir, if it may help clear thhorrible affair up.”

“You heard nothing yourself last night?”

“Nothing, until my uncle here began speak loudly. heard that, 
came down.”

“You shut up  windows  doors  night before. Did you fasten all
 windows?”

“Yes.”

“Were y all fastened thmorning?”

“Yes.”

“You have a maid who has a sweeart? think that you remarked to
your uncle last night that she had been out see him?”

“Yes,  she was  girl who waited in  drawing-room,  who may
have heard uncle’s remarks about  coronet.”

“see. You infer that she may have gone out tell her sweeart,
 that  two may have planned  robbery.”

“But what  good of all se vague ories,” cried  banker
impatiently, “when have told you that saw Arthur with  coronet
in hhs?”

“Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back that. About thgirl,
Miss Holder. You saw her return by  kitchen door, presume?”

“Yes; when went see if  door was fastened for  night met
her slipping in. saw  man, too, in  gloom.”

“Do you know him?”

“Oh, yes! he  greengrocer who brings our vegetables round. His
name FrancProsper.”

“He stood,” said Holmes, “ left of  door—that say,
farr up  path than necessary reach  door?”

“Yes, he did.”

“ he a man with a wooden leg?”

Something like fear sprang up in  young lady’s expressive black
eyes. “Why, you are like a magician,” said she. “How do you know that?”
She smiled, but re was no answering smile in Holmes’ thin, eager
face.

“should be very glad now go upstairs,” said he. “shall probably
wish go over  outside of  house again. Perhaps had better
take a look at  lower windows before go up.”

He walked swiftly round from one  or, pausing only at 
large one which looked from  hall on stable lane. Thhe
opened  made a very careful examination of  sill with his
powerful magnifying lens. “Now we shall go upstairs,” said he at last.

 banker’s dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with
a grey carpet, a large bureau,  a long mirror. Holmes went 
bureau first  looked hard at  lock.

“Which key was used open it?” he asked.

“That which my son himself indicated—that of  cupboard of 
lumber-room.”

“Have you it here?”

“That it on  dressing-table.”

Sherlock Holmes took it up  opened  bureau.

“It a noiseless lock,” said he. “It no wonder that it did not
wake you. Thcase, presume, contains  coronet. We must have a
look at it.” He opened  case,  taking out  diadem he laid it
upon  table. It was a magnificent specimen of  jeweller’s art,
  thirty-six stones were  finest that have ever seen. At one
side of  coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding three
gems had been torn away.

“Now, Mr. Holder,” said Holmes, “here  corner which corresponds
that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might beg that you will
break it off.”

 banker recoiled in horror. “should not dream of trying,” said he.

“n will.” Holmes suddenly bent hstrength upon it, but without
result. “feel it give a little,” said he; “but, though am
exceptionally strong in  fingers, it would take me all my time to
break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would
happen if did break it, Mr. Holder? re would be a noise like a
pistol shot. Do you tell me that all thhappened within a few yards
of your bed  that you heard nothing of it?”

“do not know what think. It all dark me.”

“But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, Miss
Holder?”

“confess that still share my uncle’s perplexity.”

“Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?”

“He had nothing on save only htrousers  shirt.”

“Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck
during thinquiry,  it will be entirely our own fault if we do not
succeed in clearing  matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, I
shall now continue my investigations outside.”

He went alone, at hown request, for he explained that any
unnecessary footmarks might make htask more difficult. For an hour
or more he was at work, returning at last with hfeet heavy with snow
 hfeatures as inscrutable as ever.

“think that have seen now all that re see, Mr. Holder,”
said he; “can serve you best by returning my rooms.”

“But  gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are y?”

“cannot tell.”

 banker wrung hhs. “shall never see m again!” he cried.
“ my son? You give me hopes?”

“My opinion in no way altered.”

“n, for God’s sake, what was thdark business which was acted in
my house last night?”

“If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morning
between nine  ten shall be happy do what can make it
clearer. underst that you give me _carte blanche_ act for you,
provided only that get back  gems,  that you place no limit on
 sum may draw.”

“would give my fortune have m back.”

“Very good. shall look in matter between th n.
Good-bye; it just possible that may have come over here again
before evening.”

It was obvious me that my companion’s mind was now made up about 
case, although what hconclusions were was more than could even
dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey endeavoured
sound him upon  point, but he always glided away some or
topic, until at last gave it over in despair. It was not yet three
when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurried his
chamber  was down again in a few minutes dressed as a common loafer.
With hcollar turned up, hshiny, seedy coat, hred cravat, 
hworn boots, he was a perfect sample of  class.

“think that thshould do,” said he, glancing in glass above
 fireplace. “only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but I
fear that it won’t do. may be on  trail in thmatter, or may
be following a will-o’--wisp, but shall soon know which it is. I
hope that may be back in a few hours.” He cut a slice of beef from
 joint upon  sideboard, swiched it between two rounds of
bread,  thrusting thrude meal inhpocket he started off upon
hexpedition.

had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent
spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in hh. He chucked it
down ina corner  helped himself a cup of tea.

“only looked in as passed,” said he. “am going right on.”

“Where to?”

“Oh,  or side of  West End. It may be some time before I
get back. Don’t wait up for me in case should be late.”

“How are you getting on?”

“Oh, so so. Nothing complain of. have been out Streatham since
saw you last, but did not call at  house. It a very sweet
little problem,  would not have missed it for a good deal.
However, must not sit gossiping here, but must get se disreputable
clos off  return my highly respectable self.”

could see by hmanner that he had stronger reasons for satisfaction
than hwords alone would imply. Heyes twinkled,  re was even
a touch of colour upon hsallow cheeks. He hastened upstairs,  a
few minutes later heard  slam of  hall door, which told me that
he was off once more upon hcongenial hunt.

waited until midnight, but re was no sign of hreturn, so I
retired my room. It was no uncommon thing for him be away for
days  nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his
lateness caused me no surprise. do not know at what hour he came in,
but when came down breakfast in  morning re he was with a
cup of coffee in one h   paper in  or, as fresh  trim
as possible.

“You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson,” said he, “but you
remember that our client has rar an early appointment thmorning.”

“Why, it after nine now,” answered. “should not be surprised if
that were he. thought heard a ring.”

It was, indeed, our friend  financier. was shocked by  change
which had come over him, for hface which was naturally of a broad
 massive mould, was now pinched  fallen in, while hhair seemed
me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness  lethargy
which was even more painful than hviolence of  morning before,
 he dropped heavily in armchair which pushed forward for
him.

“do not know what have done be so severely tried,” said he.
“Only two days ago was a happy  prosperous man, without a care in
 world. Now am left a lonely  dishonoured age. One sorrow
comes close upon  heels of anor. My niece, Mary, has deserted
me.”

“Deserted you?”

“Yes. Her bed thmorning had not been slept in, her room was empty,
 a note for me lay upon  hall table. had said her last
night, in sorrow  not in anger, that if she had married my boy all
might have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me say
so. It that remark that she refers in thnote:

    “‘MY DEAREST UNCLE,—feel that have brought trouble upon you,
     that if had acted differently thterrible misfortune might
    never have occurred. cannot, with ththought in my mind, ever
    again be happy under your roof,  feel that must leave you
    forever. Do not worry about my future, for that provided for;
    , above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruitless
    labour  an ill-service me. In life or in death, am ever
    your loving,


    “‘MARY.’


“What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it points
suicide?”

“No, no, nothing of  kind. It perhaps  best possible solution.
trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing  end of your troubles.”

“Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learned
something! Where are  gems?”

“You would not think £ 1000 apiece an excessive sum for m?”

“would pay ten.”

“That would be unnecessary. Three thous will cover  matter. 
re a little reward, fancy. Have you your cheque-book? Here a
pen. Better make it out for £ 4000.”

With a dazed face  banker made out  required check. Holmes walked
over hdesk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with three
gems in it,  threw it down upon  table.

With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.

“You have it!” he gasped. “am saved! am saved!”

 reaction of joy was as passionate as hgrief had been,  he
hugged hrecovered gems hbosom.

“re one or thing you owe, Mr. Holder,” said Sherlock Holmes
rar sternly.

“Owe!” He caught up a pen. “Name  sum,  will pay it.”

“No,  debt not me. You owe a very humble apology that noble
lad, your son, who has carried himself in thmatter as should be
proud see my own son do, should ever chance have one.”

“n it was not Arthur who took m?”

“told you yesterday,  repeat to-day, that it was not.”

“You are sure of it! n let us hurry him at once let him know
that  truth known.”

“He knows it already. When had cleared it all up had an interview
with him,  finding that he would not tell me  story, told it to
him, on which he had confess that was right  add  very
few details which were not yet quite clear me. Your news of this
morning, however, may open hlips.”

“For Heaven’s sake, tell me, n, what thextraordinary mystery!”

“will do so,  will show you  steps by which reached it. 
let me say you, first, that which it hardest for me say 
for you hear: re has been an understing between Sir George
Burnwell  your niece Mary. y have now fled toger.”

“My Mary? Impossible!”

“It unfortunately more than possible; it certain. Neir you nor
your son knew  true character of thman when you admitted him into
your family circle. He one of  most dangerous men in Engl—a
ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man without heart or
conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he bread his
vows her, as he had done a hundred before her, she flattered
herself that she alone had touched hheart.  devil knows best what
he said, but at least she became htool  was in  habit of
seeing him nearly every evening.”

“cannot,  will not, believe it!” cried  banker with an ashen
face.

“will tell you, n, what occurred in your house last night. Your
niece, when you had, as she thought, gone your room, slipped down
 talked her lover through  window which leads in stable
lane. Hfootmarks had pressed right through  snow, so long had he
stood re. She told him of  coronet. Hwicked lust for gold
kindled at  news,  he bent her hwill. have no doubt that
she loved you, but re are women in whom  love of a lover
extinguishes all or loves,  think that she must have been one.
She had hardly listened hinstructions when she saw you coming
downstairs, on which she closed  window rapidly  told you about
one of  servants’ escapade with her wooden-legged lover, which was
all perfectly true.

“Your boy, Arthur, went bed after hinterview with you but he
slept badly on account of huneasiness about hclub debts. In 
middle of  night he heard a soft tread pass hdoor, so he rose
, looking out, was surprised see hcousin walking very
stealthily along  passage until she disappeared inyour
dressing-room. Petrified with astonishment,  lad slipped on some
clos  waited re in  dark see what would come of this
strange affair. Presently she emerged from  room again,  in 
light of  passage-lamp your son saw that she carried  precious
coronet in her hs. She passed down  stairs,  he, thrilling
with horror, ran along  slipped behind  curtain near your door,
whence he could see what passed in  hall beneath. He saw her
stealthily open  window, h out  coronet someone in 
gloom,  n closing it once more hurry back her room, passing
quite close where he stood hid behind  curtain.

“As long as she was on  scene he could not take any action without a
horrible exposure of  woman whom he loved. But  instant that she
was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune thwould be for you,
 how all-important it was set it right. He rushed down, just as
he was, in hbare feet, opened  window, sprang out in snow,
 ran down  lane, where he could see a dark figure in 
moonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried get away, but Arthur caught
him,  re was a struggle between m, your lad tugging at one
side of  coronet,  hopponent at  or. In  scuffle,
your son struck Sir George  cut him over  eye. n something
suddenly snapped,  your son, finding that he had  coronet in his
hs, rushed back, closed  window, ascended your room,  had
just observed that  coronet had been twisted in  struggle  was
endeavouring straighten it when you appeared upon  scene.”

“it possible?” gasped  banker.

“You n roused hanger by calling him names at a moment when he
felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explain 
true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deserved
little enough consideration at hhs. He took  more chivalrous
view, however,  preserved her secret.”

“ that was why she shrieked  fainted when she saw  coronet,”
cried Mr. Holder. “Oh, my God! what a blind fool have been!  his
asking be allowed go out for five minutes!  dear fellow wanted
see if  missing piece were at  scene of  struggle. How
cruelly have misjudged him!”

“When arrived at  house,” continued Holmes, “at once went very
carefully round it observe if re were any traces in  snow
which might help me. knew that none had fallen since  evening
before,  also that re had been a strong frost preserve
impressions. passed along  tradesmen’s path, but found it all
trampled down  indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at 
far side of  kitchen door, a woman had stood  talked with a man,
whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I
could even tell that y had been disturbed, for  woman had run
back swiftly  door, as was shown by  deep toe  light heel
marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little,  n had gone away. I
thought at  time that thmight be  maid  her sweeart, of
whom you had already spoken me,  inquiry showed it was so. I
passed round  garden without seeing anything more than rom
tracks, which took be  police; but when got in stable
lane a very long  complex story was written in  snow in front of
me.

“re was a double line of tracks of a booted man,  a second double
line which saw with delight belonged a man with naked feet. was
at once convinced from what you had told me that  latter was your
son.  first had walked both ways, but  or had run swiftly, 
as htread was marked in places over  depression of  boot, it
was obvious that he had passed after  or. followed m up 
found y led  hall window, where Boots had worn all  snow
away while waiting. n walked  or end, which was a hundred
yards or more down  lane. saw where Boots had faced round, where
 snow was cut up as though re had been a struggle, , finally,
where a few drops of blood had fallen, show me that was not
mistaken. Boots had n run down  lane,  anor little smudge
of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he came 
highroad at  or end, found that  pavement had been cleared,
so re was an end that clue.

“On entering  house, however, examined, as you remember,  sill
 framework of  hall window with my lens,  could at once see
that someone had passed out. could distinguish  outline of an
instep where  wet foot had been placed in coming in. was n
beginning be able form an opinion as what had occurred. A man
had waited outside  window; someone had brought  gems;  deed
had been overseen by your son; he had pursued  thief; had struggled
with him; y had each tugged at  coronet, ir united strength
causing injuries which neir alone could have effected. He had
returned with  prize, but had left a fragment in  grasp of his
opponent. So far was clear.  question now was, who was  man 
who was it brought him  coronet?

“It an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded  impossible,
whatever remains, however improbable, must be  truth. Now, knew
that it was not you who had brought it down, so re only remained
your niece   maids. But if it were  maids, why should your son
allow himself be accused in ir place? re could be no possible
reason. As he loved hcousin, however, re was an excellent
explanation why he should retain her secret— more so as  secret
was a disgraceful one. When remembered that you had seen her at that
window,  how she had fainted on seeing  coronet again, my
conjecture became a certainty.

“ who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, for
who else could outweigh  love  gratitude which she must feel to
you? knew that you went out little,  that your circle of friends
was a very limited one. But among m was Sir George Burnwell. had
heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. It
must have been he who wore those boots  retained  missing gems.
Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might still
flatter himself that he was safe, for  lad could not say a word
without compromising hown family.

“Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures took next. I
went in  shape of a loafer Sir George’s house, managed pick up
an acquaintance with hvalet, learned that hmaster had cut his
head  night before, , finally, at  expense of six shillings,
made all sure by buying a pair of hcast-off shoes. With se I
journeyed down Streatham  saw that y exactly fitted 
tracks.”

“saw an ill-dressed vagabond in  lane yesterday evening,” said Mr.
Holder.

“Precisely. It was I. found that had my man, so came home 
changed my clos. It was a delicate part which had play n,
for saw that a prosecution must be avoided avert scal,  I
knew that so astute a villain would see that our hs were tied in 
matter. went  saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything.
But when gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried to
bluster  took down a life-preserver from  wall. knew my man,
however,  clapped a pistol hhead before he could strike.
n he became a little more reasonable. told him that we would give
him a price for  stones he held—£ 1000 apiece. That brought out 
first signs of grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he,
‘I’ve let m go at six hundred for  three!’ soon managed get
 address of  receiver who had m, on promising him that re
would be no prosecution. Off set him,  after much chaffering I
got our stones at £ 1000 apiece. n looked in upon your son, told
him that all was right,  eventually got my bed about two o’clock,
after what may call a really hard day’s work.”

“A day which has saved Engl from a great public scal,” said 
banker, rising. “Sir, cannot find words thank you, but you shall
not find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeed
exceeded all that have heard of it.  now must fly my dear boy
apologise him for  wrong which have done him. As what you
tell me of poor Mary, it goes my very heart. Not even your skill can
inform me where she now.”

“think that we may safely say,” returned Holmes, “that she is
wherever Sir George Burnwell is. It equally certain, too, that
whatever her sins are, y will soon receive a more than sufficient
punishment.”



XII.  ADVENTURE OF  COPPER BEECHES

“ man who loves art for its own sake,” remarked Sherlock Holmes,
tossing aside  advertisement sheet of _ Daily Telegraph_, “it is
frequently in its least important  lowliest manifestations that 
keenest pleasure be derived. It pleasant me observe,
Watson, that you have so far grasped thtruth that in se little
records of our cases which you have been good enough draw up, , I
am bound say, occasionally embellish, you have given prominence
not so much  many _causes célèbres_  sensational trials in
which have figured but rar those incidents which may have been
trivial in mselves, but which have given room for those faculties of
deduction  of logical synswhich have made my special
province.”

“ yet,” said I, smiling, “cannot quite hold myself absolved from
 charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my records.”

“You have erred, perhaps,” he observed, taking up a glowing cinder with
 tongs  lighting with it  long cherry-wood pipe which was wont
replace hclay when he was in a disputatious rar than a
meditative mood—“you have erred perhaps in attempting put colour 
life ineach of your statements instead of confining yourself 
task of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause effect
which really  only notable feature about  thing.”

“It seems me that have done you full justice in  matter,” I
remarked with some coldness, for was repelled by  egotism which I
had more than once observed be a strong factor in my friend’s
singular character.

“No, it not selfishness or conceit,” said he, answering, as was his
wont, my thoughts rar than my words. “If claim full justice for my
art, it because it an impersonal thing—a thing beyond myself.
Crime common. Logic rare. refore it upon  logic rar
than upon  crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what
should have been a course of lectures ina series of tales.”

It was a cold morning of  early spring,  we sat after breakfast
on eir side of a cheery fire in  old room at Baker Street. A
thick fog rolled down between  lines of dun-coloured houses,  
opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through  heavy
yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit  shone on  white cloth 
glimmer of china  metal, for  table had not been cleared yet.
Sherlock Holmes had been silent all  morning, dipping continuously
in advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last,
having apparently given up hsearch, he had emerged in no very sweet
temper lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.

“At  same time,” he remarked after a pause, during which he had sat
puffing at hlong pipe  gazing down in fire, “you can hardly
be open a charge of sensationalism, for out of se cases which you
have been so kind as interest yourself in, a fair proportion do not
treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all.  small matter in which I
endeavoured help  King of Bohemia,  singular experience of
Miss Mary Surl,  problem connected with  man with 
twisted lip,   incident of  noble bachelor, were all matters
which are outside  pale of  law. But in avoiding  sensational,
fear that you may have bordered on  trivial.”

“ end may have been so,” answered, “but  methods hold have
been novel  of interest.”

“Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do  public,  great unobservant
public, who could hardly tell a weaver by htooth or a compositor by
hleft thumb, care about  finer shades of analys deduction!
But, indeed, if you are trivial, cannot blame you, for  days of
 great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost all
enterprise  originality. As my own little practice, it seems to
be degenerating inan agency for recovering lost lead pencils 
giving advice young ladies from boarding-schools. think that I
have touched bottom at last, however. Thnote had thmorning
marks my zero-point, fancy. Read it!” He tossed a crumpled letter
across me.

It was dated from Montague Place upon  preceding evening,  ran
thus:

    “DEAR MR. HOLMES,—am very anxious consult you as wher I
    should or should not accept a situation which has been offered to
    me as governess. shall call at half-past ten to-morrow if do
    not inconvenience you. Yours faithfully,


    “VIOLET HUNTER.”


“Do you know  young lady?” asked.

“Not I.”

“It half-past ten now.”

“Yes,  have no doubt that her ring.”

“It may turn out be of more interest than you think. You remember
that  affair of  blue carbuncle, which appeared be a mere whim
at first, developed ina serious investigation. It may be so in this
case, also.”

“Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for
here, unless am much mistaken,  person in question.”

As he spoke  door opened  a young lady entered  room. She was
plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like a
plover’s egg,  with  brisk manner of a woman who has had her own
way make in  world.

“You will excuse my troubling you, am sure,” said she, as my
companion rose greet her, “but have had a very strange experience,
 as have no parents or relations of any sort from whom could ask
advice, thought that perhaps you would be kind enough tell me what
should do.”

“Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. shall be happy do anything that I
can serve you.”

could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by  manner 
speech of hnew client. He looked her over in hsearching fashion,
 n composed himself, with hlids drooping  hfinger-tips
toger, listen her story.

“have been a governess for five years,” said she, “in  family of
Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago  colonel received an
appointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia,  took hchildren over to
America with him, so that found myself without a situation. I
advertised,  answered advertisements, but without success. At last
 little money which had saved began run short,  was at my
wit’s end as what should do.

“re a well-known agency for governesses in  West End called
Westaway’s,  re used call about once a week in order see
wher anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was 
name of  founder of  business, but it really managed by Miss
Stoper. She sits in her own little office,   ladies who are
seeking employment wait in an anteroom,  are n shown in one by
one, when she consults her ledgers  sees wher she has anything
which would suit m.

“Well, when called last week was shown in little office as
usual, but found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously stout
man with a very smiling face  a great heavy chin which rolled down
in fold upon fold over hthroat sat at her elbow with a pair of
glasses on hnose, looking very earnestly at  ladies who entered.
As came in he gave quite a jump in hchair  turned quickly to
Miss Stoper.

“‘That will do,’ said he; ‘could not ask for anything better.
Capital! capital!’ He seemed quite enthusiastic  rubbed hhs
toger in  most genial fashion. He was such a comfortable-looking
man that it was quite a pleasure look at him.

“‘You are looking for a situation, miss?’ he asked.

“‘Yes, sir.’

“‘As governess?’

“‘Yes, sir.’

“‘ what salary do you ask?’

“‘had £ 4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.’

“‘Oh, tut, tut! sweating—rank sweating!’ he cried, throwing hfat
hs out in air like a man who in a boiling passion. ‘How
could anyone offer so pitiful a sum a lady with such attractions 
accomplishments?’

“‘My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine,’ said I. ‘A
little French, a little German, music,  drawing—’

“‘Tut, tut!’ he cried. ‘Thall quite beside  question. 
point is, have you or have you not  bearing  deportment of a
lady? re it in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fitted
for  rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable part in
 history of  country. But if you have why, n, how could any
gentleman ask you condescend accept anything under  three
figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at £ 100 a year.’

“You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that me, destitute as was, such an
offer seemed almost too good be true.  gentleman, however, seeing
perhaps  look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book 
took out a note.

“‘It also my custom,’ said he, smiling in  most pleasant fashion
until heyes were just two little shining slits amid  white
creases of hface, ‘advance my young ladies half ir salary
beforeh, so that y may meet any little expenses of ir journey
 ir wardrobe.’

“It seemed me that had never met so fascinating  so thoughtful
a man. As was already in debt my tradesmen,  advance was a
great convenience,  yet re was something unnatural about 
whole transaction which made me wish know a little more before I
quite committed myself.

“‘May ask where you live, sir?’ said I.

“‘Hampshire. Charming rural place.  Copper Beeches, five miles on
 far side of Winchester. It  most lovely country, my dear
young lady,   dearest old country-house.’

“‘ my duties, sir? should be glad know what y would be.’

“‘One child—one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you could
see him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack! smack! Three
gone before you could wink!’ He leaned back in hchair  laughed
heyes inhhead again.

“was a little startled at  nature of  child’s amusement, but
 far’s laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.

“‘My sole duties, n,’ asked, ‘are take charge of a single
child?’

“‘No, no, not  sole, not  sole, my dear young lady,’ he cried.
‘Your duty would be, as am sure your good sense would suggest, to
obey any little comms my wife might give, provided always that y
were such comms as a lady might with propriety obey. You see no
difficulty, heh?’

“‘should be happy make myself useful.’

“‘Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, you
know—faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked wear any dress which
we might give you, you would not object our little whim. Heh?’

“‘No,’ said I, considerably astonished at hwords.

“‘Or sit here, or sit re, that would not be offensive you?’

“‘Oh, no.’

“‘Or cut your hair quite short before you come us?’

“could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, my
hair somewhat luxuriant,  of a rar peculiar tint of chestnut.
It has been considered artistic. could not dream of sacrificing it in
thoffh fashion.

“‘am afraid that that quite impossible,’ said I. He had been
watching me eagerly out of hsmall eyes,  could see a shadow
pass over hface as spoke.

“‘am afraid that it quite essential,’ said he. ‘It a little
fancy of my wife’s,  ladies’ fancies, you know, madam, ladies’
fancies must be consulted.  so you won’t cut your hair?’

“‘No, sir, really could not,’ answered firmly.

“‘Ah, very well; n that quite settles  matter. It a pity,
because in or respects you would really have done very nicely. In
that case, Miss Stoper, had best inspect a few more of your young
ladies.’

“ manageress had sat all thwhile busy with her papers without a
word eir of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyance
upon her face that could not help suspecting that she had lost a
hsome commission through my refusal.

“‘Do you desire your name be kept upon  books?’ she asked.

“‘If you please, Miss Stoper.’

“‘Well, really, it seems rar useless, since you refuse  most
excellent offers in thfashion,’ said she sharply. ‘You can hardly
expect us exert ourselves find anor such opening for you.
Good-day you, Miss Hunter.’ She struck a gong upon  table,  I
was shown out by  page.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, when got back my lodgings  found little
enough in  cupboard,  two or three bills upon  table, began
ask myself wher had not done a very foolish thing. After all,
if se people had strange fads  expected obedience on  most
extraordinary matters, y were at least ready pay for ir
eccentricity. Very few governesses in Engl are getting £ 100 a year.
Besides, what use was my hair me? Many people are improved by
wearing it short  perhaps should be among  number. Next day I
was inclined think that had made a mistake,  by  day after I
was sure of it. had almost overcome my pride so far as go back to
 agency  inquire wher  place was still open when received
thletter from  gentleman himself. have it here  will read
it you:

“‘ Copper Beeches, near Winchester.

    “‘DEAR MISS HUNTER,—Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your
    address,  write from here ask you wher you have
    reconsidered your decision. My wife very anxious that you should
    come, for she has been much attracted by my description of you. We
    are willing give £ 30 a quarter, or £ 120 a year, so as to
    recompense you for any little inconvenience which our fads may
    cause you. y are not very exacting, after all. My wife fond
    of a particular shade of electric blue  would like you wear
    such a dress indoors in  morning. You need not, however, go to
     expense of purchasing one, as we have one belonging my dear
    daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which would, should think,
    fit you very well. n, as sitting here or re, or amusing
    yourself in any manner indicated, that need cause you no
    inconvenience. As regards your hair, it no doubt a pity,
    especially as could not help remarking its beauty during our
    short interview, but am afraid that must remain firm upon this
    point,  only hope that  increased salary may recompense you
    for  loss. Your duties, as far as  child concerned, are
    very light. Now do try come,  shall meet you with 
    dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours faithfully,


    “‘JEPHRO RUCASTLE.’


“That  letter which have just received, Mr. Holmes,  my mind
made up that will accept it. thought, however, that before
taking  final step should like submit  whole matter your
consideration.”

“Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind made up, that settles 
question,” said Holmes, smiling.

“But you would not advise me refuse?”

“confess that it not  situation which should like see a
sister of mine apply for.”

“What  meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?”

“Ah, have no data. cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formed
some opinion?”

“Well, re seems me be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastle
seemed be a very kind, good-natured man. it not possible that his
wife a lunatic, that he desires keep  matter quiet for fear
she should be taken an asylum,  that he humours her fancies in
every way in order prevent an outbreak?”

“That a possible solution—in fact, as matters st, it  most
probable one. But in any case it does not seem be a nice household
for a young lady.”

“But  money, Mr. Holmes,  money!”

“Well, yes, of course  pay good—too good. That what makes me
uneasy. Why should y give you £ 120 a year, when y could have
ir pick for £ 40? re must be some strong reason behind.”

“thought that if told you  circumstances you would underst
afterwards if wanted your help. should feel so much stronger if I
felt that you were at  back of me.”

“Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. assure you that your
little problem promises be  most interesting which has come my
way for some months. re something distinctly novel about some of
 features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger—”

“Danger! What danger do you foresee?”

Holmes shook hhead gravely. “It would cease be a danger if we
could define it,” said he. “But at any time, day or night, a telegram
would bring me down your help.”

“That enough.” She rose briskly from her chair with  anxiety all
swept from her face. “shall go down Hampshire quite easy in my
mind now. shall write Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor hair
to-night,  start for Winchester to-morrow.” With a few grateful
words Holmes she bade us both good-night  bustled off upon her
way.

“At least,” said as we heard her quick, firm steps descending 
stairs, “she seems be a young lady who very well able take
care of herself.”

“ she would need be,” said Holmes gravely. “am much mistaken if
we do not hear from her before many days are past.”

It was not very long before my friend’s prediction was fulfilled. A
fortnight went by, during which frequently found my thoughts turning
in her direction  wondering what strange side-alley of human
experience thlonely woman had strayed into.  unusual salary, 
curious conditions,  light duties, all pointed something
abnormal, though wher a fad or a plot, or wher  man were a
philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers to
determine. As Holmes, observed that he sat frequently for half an
hour on end, with knitted brows  an abstracted air, but he swept 
matter away with a wave of hh when mentioned it. “Data! data!
data!” he cried impatiently. “can’t make bricks without clay.” 
yet he would always wind up by muttering that no sister of hshould
ever have accepted such a situation.

 telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as I
was thinking of turning in  Holmes was settling down one of those
all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in, when I
would leave him stooping over a retort  a test-tube at night 
find him in  same position when came down breakfast in 
morning. He opened  yellow envelope,  n, glancing at 
message, threw it across me.

“Just look up  trains in Bradshaw,” said he,  turned back his
chemical studies.

 summons was a brief  urgent one.

“Please be at  Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow,”
it said. “Do come! am at my wit’s end.


“HUNTER.”


“Will you come with me?” asked Holmes, glancing up.

“should wish to.”

“Just look it up, n.”

“re a train at half-past nine,” said I, glancing over my
Bradshaw. “It due at Winchester at 11:30.”

“That will do very nicely. n perhaps had better postpone my
analysof  acetones, as we may need be at our best in 
morning.”

By eleven o’clock  next day we were well upon our way  old
English capital. Holmes had been buried in  morning papers all 
way down, but after we had passed  Hampshire border he threw m
down  began admire  scenery. It was an ideal spring day, a
light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting across
from west east.  sun was shining very brightly,  yet re was
an exhilarating nip in  air, which set an edge a man’s energy.
All over  countryside, away  rolling hills around Aldershot,
 little red  grey roofs of  farm-steadings peeped out from
amid  light green of  new foliage.

“Are y not fresh  beautiful?” cried with all  enthusiasm of
a man fresh from  fogs of Baker Street.

But Holmes shook hhead gravely.

“Do you know, Watson,” said he, “that it one of  curses of a mind
with a turn like mine that must look at everything with reference to
my own special subject. You look at se scattered houses,  you are
impressed by ir beauty. look at m,   only thought which
comes me a feeling of ir isolation  of  impunity with
which crime may be committed re.”

“Good heavens!” cried. “Who would associate crime with se dear old
homesteads?”

“y always fill me with a certain horror. It my belief, Watson,
founded upon my experience, that  lowest  vilest alleys in London
do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does  smiling 
beautiful countryside.”

“You horrify me!”

“But  reason very obvious.  pressure of public opinion can do
in  town what  law cannot accomplish. re no lane so vile
that  scream of a tortured child, or  thud of a drunkard’s blow,
does not beget sympathy  indignation among  neighbours,  n
 whole machinery of justice ever so close that a word of
complaint can set it going,  re but a step between  crime
  dock. But look at se lonely houses, each in its own fields,
filled for  most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of 
law. Think of  deeds of hellish cruelty,  hidden wickedness which
may go on, year in, year out, in such places,  none  wiser. Had
thlady who appeals us for help gone live in Winchester, I
should never have had a fear for her. It  five miles of country
which makes  danger. Still, it clear that she not personally
threatened.”

“No. If she can come Winchester meet us she can get away.”

“Quite so. She has her freedom.”

“What _can_ be  matter, n? Can you suggest no explanation?”

“have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would cover
 facts as far as we know m. But which of se correct can
only be determined by  fresh information which we shall no doubt
find waiting for us. Well, re  tower of  cadral,  we
shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has tell.”

 Black Swan an inn of repute in  High Street, at no distance
from  station,  re we found  young lady waiting for us. She
had engaged a sitting-room,  our lunch awaited us upon  table.

“am so delighted that you have come,” she said earnestly. “It so
very kind of you both; but indeed do not know what should do. Your
advice will be altoger invaluable me.”

“Pray tell us what has happened you.”

“will do so,  must be quick, for have promised Mr. Rucastle to
be back before three. got hleave come intown thmorning,
though he little knew for what purpose.”

“Let us have everything in its due order.” Holmes thrust hlong thin
legs out towards  fire  composed himself listen.

“In  first place, may say that have met, on  whole, with no
actual ill-treatment from Mr.  Mrs. Rucastle. It only fair to
m say that. But cannot underst m,  am not easy in my
mind about m.”

“What can you not underst?”

“ir reasons for ir conduct. But you shall have it all just as it
occurred. When came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here  drove me in
hdog-cart  Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully
situated, but it not beautiful in itself, for it a large square
block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained  streaked with damp
 bad wear. re are grounds round it, woods on three sides, 
on  fourth a field which slopes down  Southampton highroad,
which curves past about a hundred yards from  front door. This
ground in front belongs  house, but  woods all round are part
of Lord Sourton’s preserves. A clump of copper beeches immediately
in front of  hall door has given its name  place.

“was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever,  was
introduced by him that evening hwife   child. re was no
truth, Mr. Holmes, in  conjecture which seemed us be probable
in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle not mad. found her to
be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her husb, not more
than thirty, should think, while he can hardly be less than
forty-five. From ir conversation have gared that y have been
married about seven years, that he was a widower,  that honly
child by  first wife was  daughter who has gone Philadelphia.
Mr. Rucastle told me in private that  reason why she had left m
was that she had an unreasoning aversion her stepmor. As 
daughter could not have been less than twenty, can quite imagine that
her position must have been uncomfortable with her far’s young wife.

“Mrs. Rucastle seemed me be colourless in mind as well as in
feature. She impressed me neir favourably nor  reverse. She was a
nonentity. It was easy see that she was passionately devoted both to
her husb  her little son. Her light grey eyes wered
continually from one  or, noting every little want 
forestalling it if possible. He was kind her also in hbluff,
boisterous fashion,  on  whole y seemed be a happy couple.
 yet she had some secret sorrow, thwoman. She would often be lost
in deep thought, with  saddest look upon her face. More than once I
have surprised her in tears. have thought sometimes that it was 
disposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for have never
met so utterly spoiled  so ill-natured a little creature. He is
small for hage, with a head which quite disproportionately large.
Hwhole life appears be spent in an alternation between savage
fits of passion  gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain any
creature weaker than himself seems be hone idea of amusement, 
he shows quite remarkable talent in planning  capture of mice,
little birds,  insects. But would rar not talk about 
creature, Mr. Holmes, , indeed, he has little do with my story.”

“am glad of all details,” remarked my friend, “wher y seem to
you be relevant or not.”

“shall try not miss anything of importance.  one unpleasant
thing about  house, which struck me at once, was  appearance 
conduct of  servants. re are only two, a man  hwife.
Toller, for that hname, a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled
hair  whiskers,  a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since have
been with m he has been quite drunk,  yet Mr. Rucastle seemed to
take no notice of it. Hwife a very tall  strong woman with a
sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle  much less amiable. y are a
most unpleasant couple, but fortunately spend most of my time in 
nursery  my own room, which are next each or in one corner of
 building.

“For two days after my arrival at  Copper Beeches my life was very
quiet; on  third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast 
whispered something her husb.

“‘Oh, yes,’ said he, turning me, ‘we are very much obliged you,
Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as cut your hair.
assure you that it has not detracted in  tiniest iota from your
appearance. We shall now see how  electric-blue dress will become
you. You will find it laid out upon  bed in your room,  if you
would be so good as put it on we should both be extremely obliged.’

“ dress which found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade of
blue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it bore
unmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have been a
better fit if had been measured for it. Both Mr.  Mrs. Rucastle
expressed a delight at  look of it, which seemed quite exaggerated
in its vehemence. y were waiting for me in  drawing-room, which
a very large room, stretching along  entire front of  house,
with three long windows reaching down  floor. A chair had been
placed close  central window, with its back turned towards it. In
thwas asked sit,  n Mr. Rucastle, walking up  down on
 or side of  room, began tell me a series of  funniest
stories that have ever listened to. You cannot imagine how comical he
was,  laughed until was quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who
has evidently no sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sat with
her hs in her lap,  a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an
hour or so, Mr. Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time commence
 duties of  day,  that might change my dress  go to
little Edward in  nursery.

“Two days later thsame performance was gone through under exactly
similar circumstances. Again changed my dress, again sat in 
window,  again laughed very heartily at  funny stories of which
my employer had an immense _répertoire_,  which he told inimitably.
n he hed me a yellow-backed novel,  moving my chair a little
sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon  page, he begged me
read aloud him. read for about ten minutes, beginning in 
heart of a chapter,  n suddenly, in  middle of a sentence, he
ordered me cease  change my dress.

“You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious became as what
 meaning of thextraordinary performance could possibly be. y
were always very careful, observed, turn my face away from 
window, so that became consumed with  desire see what was going
on behind my back. At first it seemed be impossible, but soon
devised a means. My h-mirror had been broken, so a happy thought
seized me,  concealed a piece of  glass in my hkerchief. On
 next occasion, in  midst of my laughter, put my hkerchief
up my eyes,  was able with a little management see all that
re was behind me. confess that was disappointed. re was
nothing. At least that was my first impression. At  second glance,
however, perceived that re was a man sting in  Southampton
Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed be looking in
my direction.  road an important highway,  re are usually
people re. Thman, however, was leaning against  railings which
bordered our field  was looking earnestly up. lowered my
hkerchief  glanced at Mrs. Rucastle find her eyes fixed upon
me with a most searching gaze. She said nothing, but am convinced
that she had divined that had a mirror in my h  had seen what
was behind me. She rose at once.

“‘Jephro,’ said she, ‘re an impertinent fellow upon  road
re who stares up at Miss Hunter.’

“‘No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?’ he asked.

“‘No, know no one in se parts.’

“‘Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round  motion him to
go away.’

“‘Surely it would be better take no notice.’

“‘No, no, we should have him loitering here always. Kindly turn round
 wave him away like that.’

“did as was told,  at  same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down
 blind. That was a week ago,  from that time have not sat again
in  window, nor have worn  blue dress, nor seen  man in 
road.”

“Pray continue,” said Holmes. “Your narrative promises be a most
interesting one.”

“You will find it rar disconnected, fear,  re may prove to
be little relation between  different incidents of which speak. On
 very first day that was at  Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle took
me a small outhouse which sts near  kitchen door. As we
approached it heard  sharp rattling of a chain,   sound as
of a large animal moving about.

“‘Look in here!’ said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two
planks. ‘he not a beauty?’

“looked through  was conscious of two glowing eyes,  of a vague
figure huddled up in  darkness.

“‘Don’t be frightened,’ said my employer, laughing at  start which I
had given. ‘It’s only Carlo, my mastiff. call him mine, but really
old Toller, my groom,  only man who can do anything with him. We
feed him once a day,  not too much n, so that he always as
keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night,  God help 
trespasser whom he lays hfangs upon. For goodness’ sake don’t you
ever on any pretext set your foot over  threshold at night, for it’s
as much as your life worth.’

“ warning was no idle one, for two nights later happened look
out of my bedroom window about two o’clock in  morning. It was a
beautiful moonlight night,   lawn in front of  house was
silvered over  almost as bright as day. was sting, rapt in 
peaceful beauty of  scene, when was aware that something was
moving under  shadow of  copper beeches. As it emerged in
moonshine saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,
tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle,  huge projecting
bones. It walked slowly across  lawn  vanished in shadow
upon  or side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill my heart
which do not think that any burglar could have done.

“ now have a very strange experience tell you. had, as you
know, cut off my hair in London,  had placed it in a great coil at
 bottom of my trunk. One evening, after  child was in bed, I
began amuse myself by examining  furniture of my room  by
rearranging my own little things. re was an old chest of drawers in
 room,  two upper ones empty  open,  lower one locked. I
had filled  first two with my linen,  as had still much pack
away was naturally annoyed at not having  use of  third drawer.
It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere oversight, so I
took out my bunch of keys  tried open it.  very first key
fitted perfection,  drew  drawer open. re was only one
thing in it, but am sure that you would never guess what it was. It
was my coil of hair.

“took it up  examined it. It was of  same peculiar tint, 
 same thickness. But n  impossibility of  thing obtruded
itself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in  drawer? With
trembling hs undid my trunk, turned out  contents,  drew
from  bottom my own hair. laid  two tresses toger,  I
assure you that y were identical. Was it not extraordinary? Puzzle
as would, could make nothing at all of what it meant. returned
 strange hair  drawer,  said nothing of  matter 
Rucastles as felt that had put myself in  wrong by opening a
drawer which y had locked.

“am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes,  I
soon had a pretty good plan of  whole house in my head. re was
one wing, however, which appeared not be inhabited at all. A door
which faced that which led in quarters of  Tollers opened into
thsuite, but it was invariably locked. One day, however, as I
ascended  stair, met Mr. Rucastle coming out through thdoor,
hkeys in hh,  a look on hface which made him a very
different person  round, jovial man whom was accustomed. His
cheeks were red, hbrow was all crinkled with anger,   veins
stood out at htemples with passion. He locked  door  hurried
past me without a word or a look.

“Tharoused my curiosity, so when went out for a walk in 
grounds with my charge, strolled round  side from which could
see  windows of thpart of  house. re were four of m in a
row, three of which were simply dirty, while  fourth was shuttered
up. y were evidently all deserted. As strolled up  down,
glancing at m occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out me, looking as
merry  jovial as ever.

“‘Ah!’ said he, ‘you must not think me rude if passed you without a
word, my dear young lady. was preoccupied with business matters.’

“assured him that was not offended. ‘By  way,’ said I, ‘you seem
have quite a suite of spare rooms up re,  one of m has 
shutters up.’

“He looked surprised , as it seemed me, a little startled at my
remark.

“‘Photography one of my hobbies,’ said he. ‘have made my dark room
up re. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have come upon.
Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it?’ He spoke
in a jesting tone, but re was no jest in heyes as he looked at
me. read suspicion re  annoyance, but no jest.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, from  moment that understood that re was
something about that suite of rooms which was not know, was all
on fire go over m. It was not mere curiosity, though have my
share of that. It was more a feeling of duty—a feeling that some good
might come from my penetrating thplace. y talk of woman’s
instinct; perhaps it was woman’s instinct which gave me that feeling.
At any rate, it was re,  was keenly on  lookout for any
chance pass  forbidden door.

“It was only yesterday that  chance came. may tell you that,
besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller  hwife find something do in
se deserted rooms,  once saw him carrying a large black linen
bag with him through  door. Recently he has been drinking hard, 
yesterday evening he was very drunk;  when came upstairs re was
 key in  door. have no doubt at all that he had left it re.
Mr.  Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs,   child was with
m, so that had an admirable opportunity. turned  key gently
in  lock, opened  door,  slipped through.

“re was a little passage in front of me, unpapered  uncarpeted,
which turned at a right angle at  farr end. Round thcorner
were three doors in a line,  first  third of which were open.
y each led inan empty room, dusty  cheerless, with two windows
in  one  one in  or, so thick with dirt that  evening
light glimmered dimly through m.  centre door was closed, 
across  outside of it had been fastened one of  broad bars of an
iron bed, padlocked at one end a ring in  wall,  fastened at
 or with stout cord.  door itself was locked as well,  
key was not re. Thbarricaded door corresponded clearly with 
shuttered window outside,  yet could see by  glimmer from
beneath it that  room was not in darkness. Evidently re was a
skylight which let in light from above. As stood in  passage
gazing at  sinister door  wondering what secret it might veil, I
suddenly heard  sound of steps within  room  saw a shadow pass
backward  forward against  little slit of dim light which shone
out from under  door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at 
sight, Mr. Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly,  I
turned  ran—ran as though some dreadful h were behind me
clutching at  skirt of my dress. rushed down  passage, through
 door,  straight in arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting
outside.

“‘So,’ said he, smiling, ‘it was you, n. thought that it must be
when saw  door open.’

“‘Oh, am so frightened!’ panted.

“‘My dear young lady! my dear young lady!’—you cannot think how
caressing  soothing hmanner was—‘ what has frightened you, my
dear young lady?’

“But hvoice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. was
keenly on my guard against him.

“‘was foolish enough go in empty wing,’ answered. ‘But it
so lonely  eerie in thdim light that was frightened  ran
out again. Oh, it so dreadfully still in re!’

“‘Only that?’ said he, looking at me keenly.

“‘Why, what did you think?’ asked.

“‘Why do you think that lock thdoor?’

“‘am sure that do not know.’

“‘It keep people out who have no business re. Do you see?’ He
was still smiling in  most amiable manner.

“‘am sure if had known—’

“‘Well, n, you know now.  if you ever put your foot over that
threshold again’—here in an instant  smile hardened ina grin of
rage,  he glared down at me with  face of a demon—‘I’ll throw you
 mastiff.’

“was so terrified that do not know what did. suppose that I
must have rushed past him inmy room. remember nothing until I
found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. n thought of you,
Mr. Holmes. could not live re longer without some advice. was
frightened of  house, of  man, of  woman, of  servants,
even of  child. y were all horrible me. If could only bring
you down all would be well. Of course might have fled from  house,
but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soon
made up. would send you a wire. put on my hat  cloak, went down
 office, which about half a mile from  house,  n
returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt came inmy mind
as approached  door lest  dog might be loose, but remembered
that Toller had drunk himself ina state of insensibility that
evening,  knew that he was  only one in  household who had
any influence with  savage creature, or who would venture set him
free. slipped in in safety  lay awake half  night in my joy at
 thought of seeing you. had no difficulty in getting leave come
inWinchester thmorning, but must be back before three o’clock,
for Mr.  Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit,  will be away all
 evening, so that must look after  child. Now have told you
all my adventures, Mr. Holmes,  should be very glad if you could
tell me what it all means, , above all, what should do.”

Holmes  had listened spellbound thextraordinary story. My
friend rose now  paced up  down  room, hhs in his
pockets,  an expression of  most profound gravity upon hface.

“Toller still drunk?” he asked.

“Yes. heard hwife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing
with him.”

“That well.   Rucastles go out to-night?”

“Yes.”

“re a cellar with a good strong lock?”

“Yes,  wine-cellar.”

“You seem me have acted all through thmatter like a very brave
 sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform one
more feat? should not ask it of you if did not think you a quite
exceptional woman.”

“will try. What it?”

“We shall be at  Copper Beeches by seven o’clock, my friend  I.
 Rucastles will be gone by that time,  Toller will, we hope, be
incapable. re only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give  alarm. If
you could send her in cellar on some err,  n turn 
key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.”

“will do it.”

“Excellent! We shall n look thoroughly in affair. Of course
re only one feasible explanation. You have been brought re to
personate someone,   real person imprisoned in thchamber.
That obvious. As who thprisoner is, have no doubt that it is
 daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if remember right, who was said to
have gone America. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling her in
height, figure,   colour of your hair. Hers had been cut off,
very possibly in some illness through which she has passed,  so, of
course, yours had be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you came
upon her tresses.  man in  road was undoubtedly some friend of
hers—possibly her _fiancé_— no doubt, as you wore  girl’s dress
 were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, whenever he
saw you,  afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle was
perfectly happy,  that she no longer desired hattentions.  dog
let loose at night prevent him from endeavouring communicate
with her. So much fairly clear.  most serious point in  case
 disposition of  child.”

“What on earth has that do with it?” ejaculated.

“My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light as
 tendencies of a child by  study of  parents. Don’t you see
that  converse equally valid. have frequently gained my first
real insight in character of parents by studying ir children.
Thchild’s disposition abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty’s
sake,  wher he derives thfrom hsmiling far, as should
suspect, or from hmor, it bodes evil for  poor girl who in
ir power.”

“am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes,” cried our client. “A
thous things come back me which make me certain that you have hit
it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help thpoor
creature.”

“We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. We
can do nothing until seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be with you,
 it will not be long before we solve  mystery.”

We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached 
Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house. 
group of trees, with ir dark leaves shining like burnished metal in
 light of  setting sun, were sufficient mark  house even
had Miss Hunter not been sting smiling on  door-step.

“Have you managed it?” asked Holmes.

A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. “That Mrs.
Toller in  cellar,” said she. “Her husb lies snoring on 
kitchen rug. Here are hkeys, which are  duplicates of Mr.
Rucastle’s.”

“You have done well indeed!” cried Holmes with enthusiasm. “Now lead
 way,  we shall soon see  end of thblack business.”

We passed up  stair, unlocked  door, followed on down a passage,
 found ourselves in front of  barricade which Miss Hunter had
described. Holmes cut  cord  removed  transverse bar. n he
tried  various keys in  lock, but without success. No sound came
from within,  at  silence Holmes’ face clouded over.

“trust that we are not too late,” said he. “think, Miss Hunter,
that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder to
it,  we shall see wher we cannot make our way in.”

It was an old rickety door  gave at once before our united strength.
Toger we rushed in room. It was empty. re was no furniture
save a little pallet bed, a small table,  a basketful of linen. 
skylight above was open,   prisoner gone.

“re has been some villainy here,” said Holmes; “thbeauty has
guessed Miss Hunter’s intentions  has carried hvictim off.”

“But how?”

“Through  skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it.” He swung
himself up on roof. “Ah, yes,” he cried, “here’s  end of a
long light ladder against  eaves. That how he did it.”

“But it impossible,” said Miss Hunter; “ ladder was not re
when  Rucastles went away.”

“He has come back  done it. tell you that he a clever 
dangerous man. should not be very much surprised if thwere he
whose step hear now upon  stair. think, Watson, that it would be
as well for you have your pistol ready.”

 words were hardly out of hmouth before a man appeared at 
door of  room, a very fat  burly man, with a heavy stick in his
h. Miss Hunter screamed  shrunk against  wall at  sight of
him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward  confronted him.

“You villain!” said he, “where’s your daughter?”

 fat man cast heyes round,  n up at  open skylight.

“It for me ask you that,” he shrieked, “you thieves! Spies 
thieves! have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I’ll serve
you!” He turned  clattered down  stairs as hard as he could go.

“He’s gone for  dog!” cried Miss Hunter.

“have my revolver,” said I.

“Better close  front door,” cried Holmes,  we all rushed down 
stairs toger. We had hardly reached  hall when we heard 
baying of a hound,  n a scream of agony, with a horrible worrying
sound which it was dreadful listen to. An elderly man with a red
face  shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.

“My God!” he cried. “Someone has loosed  dog. It’s not been fed for
two days. Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!”

Holmes  rushed out  round  angle of  house, with Toller
hurrying behind us. re was  huge famished brute, its black muzzle
buried in Rucastle’s throat, while he wrid  screamed upon 
ground. Running up, blew its brains out,  it fell over with its
keen white teeth still meeting in  great creases of hneck. With
much labour we separated m  carried him, living but horribly
mangled, in house. We laid him upon  drawing-room sofa, 
having dispatched  sobered Toller bear  news hwife, I
did what could relieve hpain. We were all assembled round him
when  door opened,  a tall, gaunt woman entered  room.

“Mrs. Toller!” cried Miss Hunter.

“Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up
you. Ah, miss, it a pity you didn’t let me know what you were
planning, for would have told you that your pains were wasted.”

“Ha!” said Holmes, looking keenly at her. “It clear that Mrs. Toller
knows more about thmatter than anyone else.”

“Yes, sir, do,  am ready enough tell what know.”

“n, pray, sit down,  let us hear it for re are several points
on which must confess that am still in  dark.”

“will soon make it clear you,” said she; “ I’d have done so
before now if could ha’ got out from  cellar. If re’s
police-court business over this, you’ll remember that was  one
that stood your friend,  that was Miss Alice’s friend too.

“She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from  time that her
far married again. She was slighted like  had no say in anything,
but it never really became bad for her until after she met Mr. Fowler
at a friend’s house. As well as could learn, Miss Alice had rights of
her own by will, but she was so quiet  patient, she was, that she
never said a word about m but just left everything in Mr. Rucastle’s
hs. He knew he was safe with her; but when re was a chance of a
husb coming forward, who would ask for all that  law would give
him, n her far thought it time put a stop on it. He wanted her
sign a paper, so that wher she married or not, he could use her
money. When she wouldn’t do it, he kept on worrying her until she got
brain-fever,  for six weeks was at death’s door. n she got better
at last, all worn a shadow,  with her beautiful hair cut off; but
that didn’t make no change in her young man,  he stuck her as
true as man could be.”

“Ah,” said Holmes, “think that what you have been good enough tell
us makes  matter fairly clear,  that can deduce all that
remains. Mr. Rucastle n, presume, took thsystem of
imprisonment?”

“Yes, sir.”

“ brought Miss Hunter down from London in order get rid of 
disagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.”

“That was it, sir.”

“But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,
blockaded  house,  having met you succeeded by certain arguments,
metallic or orwise, in convincing you that your interests were 
same as his.”

“Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-hed gentleman,” said Mrs.
Toller serenely.

“ in thway he managed that your good man should have no want of
drink,  that a ladder should be ready at  moment when your master
had gone out.”

“You have it, sir, just as it happened.”

“am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller,” said Holmes, “for you
have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us.  here comes
 country surgeon  Mrs. Rucastle, so think, Watson, that we had
best escort Miss Hunter back Winchester, as it seems me that our
_locus sti_ now rar a questionable one.”

 thus was solved  mystery of  sinister house with  copper
beeches in front of  door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a
broken man, kept alive solely through  care of hdevoted wife.
y still live with ir old servants, who probably know so much of
Rucastle’s past life that he finds it difficult part from m. Mr.
Fowler  Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in
Southampton  day after ir flight,  he now  holder of a
government appointment in  isl of Mauritius. As Miss Violet
Hunter, my friend Holmes, rar my disappointment, manifested no
furr interest in her when once she had ceased be  centre of
one of hproblems,  she now  head of a private school at
Walsall, where believe that she has met with considerable success.






End of  Project Gutenberg EBook of  Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by 
Arthur Conan Doyle

*** END OF THPROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK  ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***

***** Thfile should be named 1661-0.txt or 1661-0.zip *****
Th all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/1661/

Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer  Jose Menendez

Updated editions will replace  previous one-- old editions will
be renamed.

Creating  works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in se works,
so  Foundation ( you!) can copy  distribute it in  United
States without permission  without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in  General Terms of Use part
of thlicense, apply copying  distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works protect  PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept  trademark. Project Gutenberg a registered trademark,
 may not be used if you charge for  eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with  rules very easy. You may use theBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances  research. y may be modified  printed  given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in  United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution subject 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

 FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THBEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THWORK

protect  Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting  free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing thwork
(or any or work associated in any way with  phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree comply with all  terms of  Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with thfile or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use  Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of thProject Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, underst, agree to
 accept all  terms of thlicense  intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree abide by all
 terms of thagreement, you must cease using  return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work  you do not agree be bound
by  terms of thagreement, you may obtain a refund from 
person or entity whom you paid  fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree be bound by  terms of thagreement. re are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with  full terms of thagreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. re are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow  terms of this
agreement  help preserve free future access Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in  collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all  individual
works in  collection are in  public domain in  United
States. If an individual work unprotected by copyright law in 
United States  you are located in  United States, we do not
claim a right prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on  work as long as
all references Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support  Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with  terms of thagreement for keeping 
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with  work. You can easily
comply with  terms of thagreement by keeping thwork in 
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with ors.

1.D.  copyright laws of  place where you are located also govern
what you can do with thwork. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside  United States,
check  laws of your country in addition  terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on thwork or any
or Project Gutenberg-tm work.  Foundation makes no
representations concerning  copyright status of any work in any
country outside  United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  following sentence, with active links to, or or
immediate access to,  full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which  phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which 
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated) accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  TheBook for  use of anyone anywhere in  United States 
  most or parts of  world at no cost  with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under  terms of  Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in 
  United States, you'll have check  laws of  country where you
  are located before using thebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it posted with permission of 
copyright holder),  work can be copied  distributed anyone in
 United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access a work with  phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on  work, you must comply
eir with  requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for  use of  work   Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work posted
with  permission of  copyright holder, your use  distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7  any
additional terms imposed by  copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked  Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with  permission of  copyright holder found at 
beginning of thwork.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove  full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from thwork, or any files containing a part of this
work or any or work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of thelectronic work, without
prominently displaying  sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access  full terms of  Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert  distribute thwork in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
or than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or or format used in  official
version posted on  official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
 user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of  work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or or form. Any alternate format must include 
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of  gross profits you derive from
   use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using  method
  you already use calculate your applicable taxes.  fee owed
   owner of  Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed donate royalties under thparagraph  Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such  sent  Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at  address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations  Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree  terms of  full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user return or destroy all
  copies of  works possessed in a physical medium  discontinue
  all use of  all access or copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in 
  electronic work discovered  reported you within 90 days of
  receipt of  work.

* You comply with all or terms of thagreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in thagreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation  
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC,  owner of  Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact  Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers  employees expend considerable
effort identify, do copyright research on, transcribe  proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating  Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite se efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works,   medium on which y may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or or
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
or medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for  "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3,  Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,  owner of  Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark,  any or party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under thagreement, disclaim all
liability you for damages, costs  expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT  FOUNDATION, 
TRADEMARK OWNER,  ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THAGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in thelectronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of  money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation  person you received  work from. If you
received  work on a physical medium, you must return  medium
with your written explanation.  person or entity that provided you
with  defective work may elect provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received  work electronically,  person
or entity providing it you may choose give you a second
opportunity receive  work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
 second copy also defective, you may dem a refund in writing
without furr opportunities fix  problem.

1.F.4. Except for  limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, thwork provided you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or  exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in thagreement
violates  law of  state applicable thagreement, 
agreement shall be interpreted make  maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by  applicable state law.  invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of thagreement shall not void 
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree indemnify  hold  Foundation, 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of  Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with thagreement,  any volunteers associated with 
production, promotion  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs  expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 following which you do or cause occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions any Project Gutenberg-tm work,  (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about  Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm synonymous with  free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by  widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged  new computers. It
exists because of  efforts of hundreds of volunteers  donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers  financial support provide volunteers with 
assistance y need are critical reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals  ensuring that  Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations come. In 2001,  Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created provide a secure
 permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm  future
generations. learn more about  Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation  how your efforts  donations can help, see
Sections 3  4   Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

 Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under  laws of 
state of Mississipp granted tax exempt status by  Internal
Revenue Service.  Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number 64-6221541. Contributions  Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible  full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws  your state's laws.

 Foundation's principal office in Fairbanks, Alaska, with 
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers  employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links  up to
date contact information can be found at  Foundation's web site 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive  Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations  Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon  cannot survive without wide
spread public support  donations carry out its mission of
increasing  number of public domain  licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by  widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 $5,000) are particularly important maintaining tax exempt
status with  IRS.

 Foundation committed complying with  laws regulating
charities  charitable donations in all 50 states of  United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform  it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork  many fees meet  keep up
with se requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. SEND
DONATIONS or determine  status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot  do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met  solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside  United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check  Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods  addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of or
ways including checks, online payments  credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was  originator of  Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced 
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 U.S. unless a copyright notice included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has  main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

ThWeb site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how make donations  Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how help produce our new eBooks,  how to
subscribe our email newsletter hear about new eBooks.




